ID: 114	RANK: 12	SCORE: 6.547845
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870805-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Emperors Among Orchards
---
By Gail King</HL>
<DD> 08/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Beijing  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Stonecutters squat in the field alongside the outer wall of the Jing Ling tomb, chipping away at large granite blocks. 
Watched over by a marble Chinese lion, they work with hammer and chisel, echoing the work of the 15th- and 16th-century stonecutters who worked on these magnificently crafted Ming Tombs. 
As the 30 or so men strike their blocks, the melody they make rings in harmony with the guide's rendition of his spiel: Chang Ling, Ming, Ding Ling, Ming, Jing Ling, Ming. 

   A cock crows in the distance, a workman with a shovel over his shoulder ambles by, and it is easy to believe that times have not changed much since the days of the Ming Dynasty. 

   The Ming emperors ruled a prosperous and fairly peaceful China from 1368 to 1644. 
When the third emperor moved the capital from Nanking to Beijing he set about finding a proper and peaceful royal burial place, near enough to the capital for fitting ceremonial respect to be paid, but remote enough to discourage curious visitors. 
Geomancers finally chose this forested, mountain-protected valley, about 30 miles northwest of Beijing. 

   Thirteen of the 16 Ming emperors lie here in elaborate tombs, each approached through a series of stylized, symbolic gates, screens and buildings. 
These structures are in various states of repair. 
It appears that the stonecutters are working to renovate Jing Ling, but that is not the case. 
The men are actually shaping stones to be used as the guardrails for a "flyover" (overpass) on the new superhighway being built nearby. 

   Ten thousand visitors a day come to look at the tombs. 
They drive through the Sacred Way, lined with mammoth stone animals and Chinese entrepreneurs hawking orange soda pop, T-shirts, cloisonne bracelets and fur hats. 
Past the Sacred Way, individual roads lead to the tombs. 

   Chang Ling, the oldest and largest of the tombs, has been meticulously renovated, but not excavated. 
All the tombs are easy to spot. 
The double-roofed stele pavilions immediately in front of each grave tumulus were built to command the valley, and their red roofs still dominate the scene. 
It is the names that confuse Westerners. 
The Ming emperors had a personal name and a reign name. 
Each tomb has a separate name, as does the temple within. 
Add to this the change in Chinese-to-English Romanization (Peking to Beijing, Ching-ling to Jing Ling) and it's easy to see why the tombs are referred to by number, chronologically. 
Tomb One (Chang Ling) holds the third Ming emperor, but the first to be buried in the valley. 

   The 10th tomb, Ding Ling, has been excavated and is open to the public. 
After climbing three flights of stairs, visitors can see the magnificent blue-and-white porcelain jars in which oil was set aflame as the tomb was closed (to create an oxygen-free vacuum) and the massive four-ton marble tomb doors that sealed from the inside. 

   Tomb Three, Jing Ling, where the stonecutters work, has not been excavated nor has its exterior been as meticulously restored as that of the first tomb. 
It was built by the fifth Ming emperor, who ruled 1425-35. 
Since most tourists go to the first or 10th tomb, a visit here can be a serene glimpse into Ming history and architecture. 
Once inside the outer walls it is easy to appreciate the peace that the emperors sought. 

   Inside the first courtyard, a triple set of steps leads up to what was once a sacrificial hall. 
The hall is gone, and the expanse of open ground where it was gives a feeling of spaciousness. 
A steep ramp leads up to the stele pavilion, forcing visitors to stoop as they approach the grave site. 

   The pavilion dominates Jing Ling and holds the grave stele, the emperor's flattering "tombstone." 
A hidden passageway connects this building with the actual grave site. 
The emperor does not lie alone in Jing Ling. 
His empress is buried with him, as are 10 concubines. 

   When the tomb is eventually opened it is apt to contain a trove of blue-and-white porcelain like the jars in Ding Ling that inspire feverish whispers among tourists. 
It was during the fifth emperor's reign that this famous porcelain was perfected. 

   Except for developments in porcelain and a penchant for amassing collections (including one of Korean virgins), the fifth emperor made few ripples in history. 
One incident, however, does stand out. 
When the guardian families of Jing Ling village, whose job it was to protect the tomb, cut some trees that the emperor thought important to the beauty and serenity of the site, he had the villagers executed. 

   He might not take kindly to the stonecutters, whose steady chipping helps to build a highway to bring the curious more easily to his tomb site. 
And he would certainly be appalled at the sight of the helicopter poised in a small clearing between the peach and apple orchards that ring Jing Ling. 
It waits to take customers on a noisy flying tour of the Ming Tombs. 

   ---
   Ms. King, a free-lance writer based in the Ohio Valley, recently visited China. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
