ID: 105	RANK: 15	SCORE: 6.850073
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881114-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Problem --- Showing Off: World's Fairs Celebrate Inventiveness And Point to Tomorrow's Pacesetters </HL>
<AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   ENGLAND REIGNED supreme in 1851. 
Her colonies were vast, her navy invincible, her industrial and technological might unquestioned. 
But in London, at the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851, America stole the show. 

   Cyrus McCormick's reaper drew thousands to a nearby farm. 
Goodyear's India rubber products won a big prize. 
The biggest shocker, though, was the American system of manufacturing -- precision tools, interchangeable parts -- that made possible an unbelievable flow of pistols, clocks and other items at cheap prices. 

   The great fairs and expositions of the 19th and 20th century have always been a showcase of new technologies and inventions, but the fairs have been something more. 
They are a wonderful place to watch the gradual passing of technological supremacy from one part of the world to another. 

   In the decades following the Crystal Palace extravaganza, it was clear that America was seizing that supremacy. 
The nation's inventors developed the telephone, the incandescent lamp, the typewriter, the phonograph. 
Near the end of the century, Americans began building skyscrapers. 

   The British admired what they called the "American system of manufactures," but much of the technology the Americans used was actually borrowed from Britain and other European nations. 
Andrew Carnegie, for example, built a steel empire -- but it was initially based on the work of Sir Henry Bessemer, an Englishman. 

   History would repeat itself in later decades, but by then the scientific innovator would be America. 
The great technological borrower and commercial exploiter would be Japan. 

   The Chicago World's Columbian Exposition, 1893
   America was showing off. 
If the Paris fair of 1889 had been graced by the spectacular new iron tower designed by Eiffel, then the 1893 Chicago fair would have its own symbol, equally impressive, totally American. 
A man named Gale Ferris constructed a giant wheel, 250 feet in diameter, capable of carrying 1400 people at a time. 

   The message of the 1893 fair was this: America is now the equal of Europe. 
The great capitalists of the day -- the steel, sugar, oil, beef and coal barons -- hired the finest architects, who produced a pseudoclassical with statuary, fountains and columns. 

   On May 1, president Grover Cleveland opened the fair by pressing a golden telegraph key and 10,000 electric lights flashed on. 
At night the effect was ethereal, sensational. 
All the buildings had been painted white, and the place soon became known all over the world as the "White City." 

   The same year, the Duryea brothers put the first American auto on the road. 
They were 10 years behind Gottlieb Daimler of Germany. 
But, it was American manufacturing genius -- in the person of Henry Ford -- that brought the product within the grasp of the ordinary person. 
Ford introduced the moving assembly line in 1913, cutting costs, cutting prices, and expanding output. 

   By the end of World War I, half the cars in the world had been made by Ford Motor Co. 

   At the time of the 1893 fair, Japan was still a long way from making cars. 
But it was on the way. 
Twenty five years before, under the young emperor Meiji, it had set itself a seemingly impossible goal: to catch up with the West in technology. 
It wasn't making cars, no -- but it had already begun to build ships and manufacture guns, locomotives, machinery and textile mills. 

   The New York World's Fair, 1939
   At this fair, the U.S. showed it wasn't just the equal of Europe but its superior. 
With the Depression still lingering, the 1939 fair offered hope -- the hope of a brighter future through technology. 
American technology. 

   RCA unveiled its television developments on opening day, with Franklin D. Roosevelt becoming the first U.S. president to appear on the tube. 
David Sarnoff of RCA, writing shortly before the opening of the fair, predicted a future of mobile car phones, facsimile transmission and overseas TV broadcasts. 

   The runaway hit of the 1939 fair was the General Motors Futurama pavilion. 
People stood in line for hours to see a vision of America in 1960 -- some 36,000 square feet of model American landscape, transformed by a vast web of superhighways. 

   Sitting in a soft chair, you glided 20 years into the future. 
Before you spread a giant landscape of the future. 
Over here was a thriving and prosperous city of heavy industry. 
Over there was an even more futuristic city, with shiny glass skyscrapers, outlying districts for business and for housing, and an outlying airport, all connected by a network of highways. 
It looked a lot like Los Angeles today. 

   The Japanese exhibit at the fair focused only on traditional housing, gardens, and culture. There was no hint that Japan had already succeeded in building giant industrial combines and a war machine that was already in action against China. -
   The New York World's Fair, 1964
   Japanese electronics companies introduced some early products at this fair, including the first calculator with an electronic readout. 
But they were put in the shade by Ford Motor. 
It unveiled the Mustang, marking perhaps the zenith of the U.S. auto industry. 
RCA introduced color television. 

   While this was going on, however, the first Japanese cars, made by Toyota and Nissan, were beginning to arrive on American shores. 
No one could have foretold the tremendous impact they would eventually have on Detroit's supremacy. 
And no one could have foretold that Japan would dominate the world's manufacture of color televisions. 

   The Tsukuba Exposition, 1985
   Japan's real debut as a world-class technological power didn't come until 1985, when 20 million people descended on Tsukuba Science City, north of Tokyo, for an $840 million extravaganza. 

   Tsukuba was new and unpopular, a thoroughly planned city with all the warmth of most thoroughly planned new cities. 
When the Japanese government relocated dozens of government laboratories to Tsukuba in the 1970s, scientists howled. 
Tsukuba offered rice paddies, look-alike laboratory buildings, a dearth of shops and an overabundance of ennui -- but the fair itself was a celebration of Japan's awesome gains in technology. 

   The U.S. was there, too, but its exhibits were overshadowed by those of the Japanese. 
By this time, the U.S. also was losing to Japanese rivals in semiconductor memory chips, piling up huge trade deficits with Japan, and was on the verge of becoming a debtor nation. 

   Tsukuba was very much a Japanese celebration, and a playful one. 
Few of the exhibits even tried to explain the intricacies of chemistry, biology or computers; much of the fair was aimed at young people, especially children. 

   They were entertained by huge television screens, cute little robots, enormous crowds. 
The biggest hit of the fair was the Fujitsu pavilion, which featured Fanuc Man, a 16-foot robot weighing 25 tons, a gigantic symbol of Japan's power in robotics. 
Fanuc Man could lift 400-pound barbells and could also assemble a small replica of himself. 

   The fair never explored the darker aspects of technological progress, even though the Japanese themselves were beginning to worry about invasion of privacy, computer crime, system failure, robot error, displaced workers, mental stress, video-terminal eye strain, and alienation of humans from each other. 
Tsukuba, however, gave only one message: Love technology. 

   Atsushi Shimokobe, one of the fair's senior planners, says he remembers seeing children who embraced computers and wouldn't let go. 
"There were some adults who saw that and were happy about it, but it made other adults anxious and uneasy," he recalls. 

   Even some of the children made it clear they wanted a future with something more than just technology, technology, technology. 
Peter Eggleton, science attache at the Canadian Embassy in Tokyo, remembers taking his nine-year-old daughter's class to Expo '85. 
On the bus ride home, everybody talked about seeing a horse in one of the Japanese pavilions and a baby elephant from Sri Lanka. 
Says Mr. Eggleton, "This was a strong message for me." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
