ID: 105	RANK: 24	SCORE: 6.193976
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870313-0116 </DOCNO>
<HL> Japan Finally Gives Credit to Its 'Edison'
---
Inventor Was A Pariah
Until Discovered by U.S.
---
By Stephen Kreider Yoder
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> JAPAN
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN>
<DATELINE> SENDAI, Japan  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   For three decades, Japanese industry all but ignored Junichi Nishizawa's inventions. 
Bureaucrats thwarted his patent applications; a hostile academic community blackballed him. 

   His offense? 
He was young and outspoken -- qualities valued in the West but often resented in Japan. 
His ideas too often clashed with accepted theories. 
But if Japan abhors open criticism, it also reveres the U.S. as the source of innovation. 
So when the Americans discovered Mr. Nishizawa in the early 1980s, his reputation at home was transformed almost overnight from pariah to national hero. 

   "Companies here would still rather look to the U.S.," says the 61-year-old professor at Sendai's Tohoku University. 
"They don't believe in the Japanese." 

   Today, Mr. Nishizawa appears regularly on television documentaries. 
Foreign and domestic awards adorn his office walls, his students are eagerly sought by electronics giants. 
The inventor of dozens of novel electronic devices, Mr. Nishizawa has been dubbed "the Edison of modern Japan" by one business magazine. 

   His story is a familiar one in Japan. 
In a kind of perverse "not invented here" syndrome, Japan has often ignored its own innovators, looking instead to the West for technological ideas. 
Bright young Japanese scientists are stifled by the hierarchy and consensus system that helped produce the country's powerful economy. 

   But now Japan is beginning to recognize it needs unconventional thinkers to help spark creativity in its industry. 
Says Genya Chiba, director at the government-run Research Development Corp. of Japan: "The controversial figures are the ones we're looking for." 

   Mr. Nishizawa fits that mold. 
Says Jim Harris, a Stanford University electronics professor: "He pursued the unconventional, probably far more than anyone else in the Japanese electronics industry." 

   Mr. Nishizawa has sparked controversy from his student days. 
As a graduate researcher at Tohoku University in 1949 he proposed a novel device that he called a PIN diode, a precursor to many semiconductor devices. 
But the 24-year-old Mr. Nishizawa's theory had a major flaw -- it rebutted a widely accepted American theory. 
American science was gospel here in 1949. 
Challenging it was heresy. 

   Japanese researchers were scandalized. 
Mr. Nishizawa's youthful self-confidence only fueled their outrage. 
Outrage turned to ostracism. 
Scientists challenged him in public, while back at the lab, peers spread rumors that he was fabricating research data. 

   "In Japan, wisdom comes with age. 
People saw him as a young wise guy," says Atsushi Abe, a Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. manager who studied under Mr. Nishizawa. 

   American labs eventually confirmed Mr. Nishizawa's PIN-diode findings, but he remained a pariah for years, especially at such influential institutions as the University of Tokyo. 

   In 1953, for instance, Mr. Nishizawa invented a photodiode, a tiny light-emitting device, and took it to several Japanese corporate labs. 
They weren't interested. 
"America hasn't even made one of these," Mr. Nishizawa recalls one official telling him. 
"There's no reason Japan should be able to." 

   When Mr. Nishizawa announced at a 1964 meeting that light would flow though glass strands -- now called optical fibers-- he was laughed off the podium. 
Later, Japan's patent office repeatedly rejected his patent applications for a type of optical fiber. 
The refusal, he argues, allowed U.S. inventors to patent the vital discovery first. 

   Mr. Nishizawa persevered. 
From his independent Semiconductor Research Institute, set up in Sendai in 1961, he turned out inventions and theories and urged them on a reluctant industry -- often unsuccessfully. 
"He had very good ideas but he pushed them too hard and too fast," says Hisao Oka, general manager of research and development at Mitsubishi Electric Corp. 
"He was playing the flute, but no one was dancing." 

   Meanwhile, Mr. Nishizawa began unleashing a barrage of criticism at Japan's universities and companies, which he accuses of suffocating creativity and ignoring indigenous ideas. 
While such rhetoric raised eyebrows at home, the West began to take note of Mr. Nishizawa's inventions. 
McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp., he says, were first to show interest in a device called the static induction transistor, or SIT. 

   And in 1983, the California-based Electrical Power Research Institute agreed to test a Nishizawa device called an SI thyristor after Japanese companies had refused even to look at it. 
The same year, the American Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers honored Mr. Nishizawa for his work on semiconductors. 

   Later in 1983 came rumors that he was a Nobel Prize nominee. 
He didn't get the prize, but the speculation brought him new status at home. 
The Japanese government awarded him a coveted culture prize; companies that had earlier shunned him fell over each other to get at his devices. 

   And as more and more of his former students hold influential jobs among Japan's electronics giants, industry support for him is growing. 
"Every big maker has some kind of connection to Mr. Nishizawa," says a Sanyo Electric Co. official. 

   Indeed, so closely associated has he become with technological innovation that mere rumors he is advising a company can send stock prices soaring. 
Shares of firms that use the professor's inventions are called "Nishizawa stocks." 

   Despite his hard-won fame, Mr. Nishizawa still has plenty of critics in both Japan and the U.S. 
They denounce him as a self-promoter who overrates his discoveries -- few of which, they say, have yet resulted in practical products. 

   "Mr. 
Nishizawa has lots of grand ideas. 
He's always announcing: 'I did, I did it,' but then you don't see his ideas being carried out," says Japanese corporate executive who requests anonymity. 

   Adds an electronics specialist at a major U.S. university, who also asked that his name not be printed, "He champions what he does very enthusiastically. 
But I don't think anybody in the U.S. would say he's made major contributions to silicon technology." 

   Though most of his detractors maintain a public silence about him these days, Mr. Nishizawa isn't under any illusion that their number is dwindling. 
In fact, he considers one assessment that "50% of the people" are against him as optimistic. 

   "It's still 70% enemies," he says. 
"I'll be doing battle to the day I die." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
