ID: 105	RANK: 27	SCORE: 6.055717
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870107-0004 </DOCNO>
<HL> Japanese Firm to Stop Selling TVs to GE
In Price Dispute Over Higher Yen Value
---
By Johnnie L. Roberts
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GE MC FREST CANDA
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   A big Japanese television maker will stop supplying color sets to General Electric Co. because of a dispute over how a sharply higher yen value should be reflected in the price. 

   Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Osaka, sought to increase prices on sets sold to GE for resale in the U.S. under the GE brand name. 
The price increase was necessary, Matsushita said, because of the significant rise in the yen's value against the dollar. 
But Fairfield, Conn.-based GE wanted a price reduction, Matsushita said. 
GE declined to comment on the reasons for the impasse. 

   The development may signal a stronger resolve by Japanese consumer electronics concerns to raise the price of goods that they sell in the U.S. Moreover, it may mark the beginning of significant gains in the U.S. market for consumer electronic products from South Korea and Taiwan, where currencies haven't experienced the sharp reevaluations that the yen has. 

   For GE, the move may lead to increased domestic production of televisions by its RCA Corp. unit. 
Before GE bought RCA, it had announced plans to stop making television sets. 

   With a 66% jump in the yen's value since its low in February 1985, Japanese manufacturing cost in dollars has climbed substantially. 
Theoretically, the price in dollars for Japanese goods should rise in response. 
Indeed, some companies increased prices last year but not enough to offset the strong yen; prices for consumers, however, in some cases, fell. 

   Some Japanese makers, including Matsushita, have attempted through efficiency gains to blunt the need for price increases. 
In an effort to maintain market share, some companies have also sliced profit margins rather than raise prices. 
"There has been an ongoing program of making every attempt to increase productivity," said a spokesman for Matsushita. 
"We have made every effort possible to improve distribution." 

   Yet the Matsushita-GE impasse indicates that some Japanese manufacturers may now have decided to draw the line. 
"There is a certain pressure point that you reach and we have reached it," the Matsushita spokesman said. 
"We could give no more." 
Matsushita also sells electronic products in the U.S. under the brand names Quasar, Panasonic and Technics. 

   David Lachenbruch, editorial director of Television Digest, a trade publication, said the development is "just the beginning" and predicted "tremendous upheaval" in the consumer electronics market. 
"The Japanese have been absorbing this change (in currency valuation), and they can't do it forever," he said. 
"Their shareholders won't let them." 
There clearly is pressure on some Japanese companies from an earnings standpoint. 
For example, Sony Corp.'s consolidated earnings tumbled 43% in the fiscal year ended Oct. 31 to the equivalent of $257 million. 

   Indeed, other evidence of the upheaval is already apparent as the industry begins to make adjustments. 
The most dramatic change appears to be the ascendency of other manufacturers, particularly South Korean concerns, to whom American consumer electronics companies are increasingly turning for supplies. 
For the 10 months ending Oct. 31, imports of fully assembled color televisions from South Korea rose 43.4% from the year-earlier period, while Japanese imports fell 4.9%, said Mr. Lachenbruch. 

   Emerson Radio Co., one of the nation's biggest importers of consumer electronics products, has changed suppliers "in a small number of cases," said Stephen Lane, president. 
There has been no wholesale switching, however, because the Japanese have been absorbing much of the effect of the rising yen. 
In addition, Emerson Radio has traditionally bought supplies from companies throughout the Orient, and has built currency hedges into its contracts to protect itself. 

   A spokesman for the U.S. arm of South Korea's Samsung Electronics Corp., said "we expect to be able to take advantage of this dollar yen problem" this year. 
Last year, Samsung said its opportunity to expand its U.S. market share was limited only by its inventories. 
"We could have sold everything we could have gotten our hands on," the spokesman said. 
"This year, we are in a much better supply situation." 

   In GE's case, the company said one of its options is to seek supplies elsewhere, presumably including other nations. 

   Ironically, in an effort to adjust to the higher yen values, even the Japanese are turning to South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore for supplies, industry officials said. 
"The Japanese are using Korean manufacturing to build some of their components," said the spokesman for Samsung, which is supplying some Japanese firms. 

   Moreover, most major Japanese concerns have rapidly moved production, or at least, final assembly, to the U.S. Sony, for example, has announced plans to expand its color-TV plant in San Diego, Calif. 
Matsushita has two facilities, including one in Vancouver, Wash., to serve the GE contract. 
Manufacturing the products here doesn't fully immunize the Japanese from the yen's effect because some parts are still made in Japan and shipped to the U.S. for assembly. 

   With its acquisition of RCA, a major consumer electronics player, GE could obtain supplies from its unit. 
For the last two years, RCA has been rapidly automating its huge final-assembly plant in Indianapolis. 
The company makes TV chassis in Mexico, where labor costs are low. 
It makes picture tubes in Pennsylvania and cabinets in North Carolina. 

   GE and Matsushita declined to comment on the number of sets supplied under the existing contract. 

   Separately, in Washington the U.S. International Trade Commission ruled that imports of color-television picture tubes from South Korea, Japan, Singapore and Canada may be hurting domestic makers and their workers. 

   The preliminary decisions, made in response to complaints filed by several U.S. trade unions, mean that the Commerce Department and the ITC will continue to investigate charges that the imports have been sold at unfairly low prices in violation of the anti-dumping act. 
If both agencies conclude that the imports are in violation of U.S. trade law, anti-dumping duties may be ordered on them. 

   Officials at the commission said the imports from all four countries totaled about $133 million in the first nine months of last year, up from $120 million during all of 1985. 
South Korea is the largest foreign supplier, followed by Japan, Singapore and Canada. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
