ID: 105	RANK: 31	SCORE: 6.002061
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871030-0155 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Patent Truth in Poland: Inventors
Find That Brilliance Is Hard to Market
---
By Barry Newman
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP </IN>
<DATELINE> WARSAW  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "Here's a merry-go-round," says Bronislawa Fitak. 
"Here's a butterfly. 
A shovel. 
A hairdryer. 
Here's a swan. 
A hang glider. 
A kangaroo." 

   Standing behind a table in a friend's apartment, Mrs. Fitak flips, bends and stretches an object of unimaginable malleability into a succession of imaginary shapes. 
She invented the thing, known to her admirers as the Polish Rubik's Cube. 
It is made of paper. 

   Mrs. Fitak, who is 56 years old and has intense eyes, makes a sombrero and puts it on. 
She folded paper for years before perfecting her complex accordion. 
In 1983, a journalist came across her entertaining some children. 
An article came out. 
Then television got interested. 

   "All Poland watched," she says. 
"Here's a birthday cake. 
Everybody liked it. 
Wine glass. 
Mushroom. 
That's where it ended. 
People just looked." 
She kneads the thing into a piano. 
"It also walks down stairs by itself," she says. 

   In March, Mrs. Fitak's invention won Polish patent No. 42,195. 
But the Polish toy industry didn't beat a path to her door. 
Ideas like hers don't count for much in Poland. 
No company has to create demand or outsmart rivals. 
The toy industry makes toys already. 
Why make one more? 

   Poland's economic reformers try to get the answer across. 
They want managers to care about profits. 
Managers don't. 
So reformers promote innovation with tax breaks. 
Managers yawn. 
Poles with new ideas make money only if their inventions are produced, and produce profits. 
Much of the time all they produce is a letdown. 

   "I can't stand listening to the rustle of paper anymore," says an inventor caught in the bureaucratic mill. 
"It isn't quite normal being an inventor. 
It would be better to go dancing." 

   Yet not even the polka suppresses the urge to invent. 
Hundreds of Poles keep at it. 
A few luck out: Of 76,993 patents granted by the U.S. in 1986, 13 came from here. 
The less lucky tinker bravely on, waiting for promised reforms to take hold. 
For moral support, they hang around their local inventors' club. 

   The Warsaw club is housed in a building with a wooden canopy above the entrance, a contrivance that prevents loose masonry from falling on visitors. 
In the meeting room, patent officer Przemyslaw Groszkowski sits drinking tea. 

   "Each company has a unit of technical progress," he says. 
"We should therefore have great technical progress." 
He looks up and laughs as a large man wearing a black shirt and a white tie comes in. 
"But we have a problem. 
It's easier to do things the old way. 
You might say Mr. Jaroszynski here has had some troubles." 

   Mr. Jaroszynski (first name Wlodzimierz) sits heavily and laughs until he coughs. 
Then he lights a cigarette and tells his story. 

   "People say I have a technical imagination. 
I always ask myself, 'What can be improved?'" 

   Five years ago, Mr. Jaroszynski decided to improve the car. 
He came up with a device the size of a drinking glass that screws onto an engine and makes it burn gas better. 
It saves fuel. 
"We have a shortage of fuel here," he says. 
"You'd think I'd get help." 

   But no state company would consider the gadget without a prototype, and none would pay to build one. 
Mr. Jaroszynski had to borrow eight million zlotys (an average Pole earns that in 20 years) and build one himself. 
He patented it, and made the rounds again. 

   "The Warsaw car factory was interested," he says, "but they wouldn't produce it. 
It interfered with their plan." 

   Finally, Mr. Jaroszynski gave up on the state. 
He sold a license to Donau Trading Co., a small, private maker of pipe connectors backed by Poles abroad. 
Donau cranked out 20,000 fuel-savers this year. 
But Mr. Jaroszynski, still in debt, hasn't seen much money yet. 
So he's pursuing a new idea: the "anti-AIDS" syringe. 
"The construction makes it impossible to use more than once," he says, digging into his briefcase. 
"It will be good for drug addicts," he says. 
"At the moment, I'm trying to sell it," says Mr. Jaroszynski. 
"In Poland, as usual, nobody's interested." 

   To climb out of this hole, a Polish inventor has two options. 
He can give the state precisely what it wants, or he can tell the state to get lost. 
Piotr Penczek picked option one. 
That's why he has 140 patents, more than anyone else in Poland. 

   "If an invention is really new," he says, "the success rate is lower. 
When industry has to change something substantial, you get trouble. 
I strive to avoid such inventions." 

   Prof. Penczek, a restrained man with neat white hair, works at the Institute of Industrial Chemistry, one of the state's cumbrous research combines. 
He knows plastics. 
And he knows Polish managers. 
They all lack hard currency, so any invention that cuts imports or boosts exports excites them. 
They lack raw materials, so any invention that fills a supply gap gets produced. 
"The new idea isn't the main point," he says. 

   But it surely is the main point for Zbigniew Bogusz. 
He picked option two. 

   A loud alarm goes off as the gate of the Bogusz compound slides open one evening, revealing a flood-lit Mr. Bogusz. 
"I'm just back from Hamburg," he says, walking past the house to his trinket factory. 
"The Germans were wide-eyed." 

   In the factory office, he pulls out the drawers of a tall case. 
Each contains buttons, earrings, necklaces, buckles, pins and pendants -- all adorned with metallic filigree. 
He says he has developed a process for applying patterns to any material of any shape. 
"Suddenly, it dawned on me," he says. 

   A year ago, he was a craftsman, working in leather. 
Now he privately mass produces costume jewelery and employs 30 people. 
He built his own machinery, though strangers don't get to see it: patent pending. 
"Nobody knows how to make things this way," Mr. Bogusz says. 
"I have to do it myself." 
What about the Polish state? 
"I've never tried. 
I don't like tilting at windmills." 

   But it's a rare Polish inventor who can go it alone. 
Mrs. Fitak, the toy inventor, is a retired seamstress with no spare cash and just one small comfort: If industry ignores her, television somehow doesn't. 

   "C'mon, get going!" says a voice over the studio loudspeaker. 
This is a taping of Poland's weekly kids' show; the director doesn't waste time. 
Mrs. Fitak sits under the lights surrounded by nine children. 
Each holds one of her paper doohickeys. 

   "I've come to show you a new toy," Mrs. Fitak says. 
"Look, a sea horse. 
Barbells. 
See what you get? 
Lighthouse. 
Umbrella." 

   She goes on and on. 
In awe, the kids try it themselves. 
A girl folds a bow, a boy folds a fan. 
"How many can you make?" asks one. 

   "I have 312," she says. 
"Hedgehog. 
I'm aiming at. . ." 

   "Okay, let's get rid of this lady," the loudspeaker cuts in. 

   Mrs. Fitak bundles off, leaving a few of her gizmos behind. 
A technician picks one up and folds it. 
A duck. 
His colleague picks up another. 
Hassock. 
Space helmet. 

   "You want to know something?" says the studio manager, folding up his top hat. 
"In America, you could make a million dollars with this thing. 
Not in Poland, unfortunately." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
