ID: 105	RANK: 33	SCORE: 5.956842
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880610-0015 </DOCNO>
<HL> Small Business (A Special Report): The Dark Side --- The Good, the Bad and the Useless </HL>
<AUTHOR> Ron Iori </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   INVENTIONS are the mainstay of many small businesses, and sometimes the small businesses turn into big businesses. 
Take Apple Computer. 
Born in the garage of one of the founders, the company virtually invented the home-computer industry. 

   Not every invention is that successful, of course. 
Some are just plain wacky. 
Others are entirely practical but either aren't marketable or are ahead of their time. 

   Bathrooms seem to preoccupy many inventors. 
In Atlanta, Walter Hibbs's ex-wife used to complain that he didn't put down the seat after using the toilet. 
So he developed Seat Down, a hydraulic device that is attached to the seat of the toilet. 
Lifting the seat activates a timer that slowly closes the seat over two minutes, which Mr. Hibbs says is four times longer than the average man needs. 
The couple got a divorce anyway. 

   Another bathroom product, the toilet-sound duplicator, may seem useless in the U.S., but Japanese women like it. 
Embarrassed by the sounds they make in public toilets, Japanese women flush an average of 2.7 times a visit to drown out the offensive sounds. 
But this wastes water, which became a problem during a water shortage in Japan last summer. 
The answer: Etiquettone, a battery-powered device mounted next to the toilets that the user pushes to activate a 25-second flushing sound. 
The government and private companies are buying about 3,000 of the devices a month. 

   Children have an interesting way of looking at problems. 
Invent America, a program that sponsors an annual invention contest for elementary-school children, has come up with plenty of proof of their problem-solving ability. 

   Maurice Scales of Suitland, Md., saw his baby sister constantly smashing her fingers in doors. 
The first-grader developed Baby No-Mash, a device that fits on the top of a door to prevent it from closing completely. 
On the lighter side, 12-year-old Christina Ahrens of Tempe, Ariz., saw a need for a product for her male friends. 
She was a winner in the 1987 contest for her Fly Guard -- an attachment to a zipper that sounds an alarm when the zipper is down. 

   While these children's ideas haven't yet been turned into successful commercial products, they certainly seem practical. 
Adults, on the other hand, often come up with highly impractical inventions. 
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is flooded with them. 

   The electronic singing toy frog is an example. 
An amusing novelty, yes; a practical paperweight, no. 
Animals need toys, too, so a California man invented a ball that rolls when dogs and cats wearing an electronic collar approach the toy. 

   Needless to say, adults do invent some very practical items -- in some cases, too practical. 
Burton Siegel of Chicago-based Budd Engineering designed a beauty-salon hair dryer that would accomplish the job in about five minutes instead of 20 minutes to a half-hour. 
Great, right? 
Wrong. 
Beauticians want the drying stage to take more time, so that they can get a good head start on the next customer. 
Good idea, wrong market. 

   An example of an invention that came before its time appeared 10 years ago in the Hammacher Schlemmer catalog. 
For $750, you could buy a personal computer, complete with keyboard and some software, that used your television screen as its monitor. 
None sold, and the item was removed from the catalog after one year. 
Well, all right, it was kind of crude: It did some word processing and simple calculations, and you could play games on it, and that's all. 
But it was a personal computer and it went nowhere. 

   Another Hammacher Schlemmer offering might also have been a bit too futuristic. 
The 1983 catalog offered a robotic maid for about $7,900 that could provide security by buzzing the local cops, clean the house and act as a personal butler. 
Two prototypes were built; none was sold. 

   And here's an invention for inventors who might be too stressed out from all their toiling. 
Maybe screaming would help but you don't want to upset anyone within hearing distance. 
A New York woman patented a sound-muffling cup for such situations. 
Just carry it around with you and, when you get the urge, scream into it. 

   ---
   Mr. Iori is an editor in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
