ID: 105	RANK: 66	SCORE: 5.320314
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870827-0137 </DOCNO>
<HL> Rush to Exploit New Superconductors
Makes Japan Even More Patent-Crazy
---
By Stephen Kreider Yoder
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> JAPAN
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN>
<DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Japanese companies are on a patenting binge. 

   Already this year, Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd. has filed for more than 700 patents for new superconductor materials that carry electricity with no wasteful resistence, more than most big American companies apply for in a year in all fields. 
And NEC Corp., Mitsubishi Electric Corp. and other Japanese industrial giants have each filed for more than 100 superconductor patents. 

   "We've got a patent war going on," says Tsuneharu Nitta, director of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.'s research laboratories. 

   Such wars aren't unusual. 
The habitual rush to patent in Japan, says a U.S. government official, is "massive." 
Indeed, nearly half the world's patents filed in any one year come from the Japanese. 

   The kings of Japan's patent seekers are a familiar cast -- conglomerates such as Toshiba Corp. and Hitachi Ltd. Toshiba, for example, filed about 20,000 patents last year. 
By contrast, International Business Machines Corp. applies for about 600 in an average year. 

   Japanese companies say they need large quantities of patents to compete. 
In a country where consumer goods have model changes every six months, companies believe they need a wide variety of patents to anticipate rivals' developments. 

   Yet corporate and patent-office officials increasingly say Japan must temper its patent addiction. 
The government, for example, is raising fees, changing laws and otherwise pressuring companies to limit their patent applications. 
"Japanese companies patent too much," says Kiyoshi Nagai, Toshiba's senior vice president for research and development. 

   Last year Japan's patent office processed 529,952 applications, about five times the number filed in the U.S. 
In 1984, patents filed in Japan accounted for 44% of the world total. 

   Some industrialists cite the large number of patent applications in Japan as proof that the country is overcoming the West in innovative technologies. 
Others concede that the voracious Japanese appetite for patents is simply a defensive move to thwart patent applications by rivals. 

   Superconductivity is a prime example. 
"No one really expects to get that many patents," Takeshi Nagano, president of Mitsubishi Metal Corp., was quoted as saying. 
"If they get the applications out, they can use them to invalidate someone else's patent request." 

   The superconductivity-patent binge was sparked off by IBM's announcement in February that its scientists had discovered a new superconducting ceramic capable of working at much higher, cheaper-to-maintain temperatures. 
Japan's patent office won't say how many, or what kind of, superconductivity patents have been filed until after a standard 18-month waiting period. 
But a survey of 167 companies last month showed that they had applied for a total of 1,500 superconductivity patents. 
Other estimates place the number at more than 2,000. 

   With prospects of a multibillion-dollar market, several companies have set up special divisions just to prepare patent applications to cover all conceivable contingencies. 
Others, such as Sumitomo Electric and Matsushita Electric, have instructed researchers to dream up as many uses as possible for the new superconductors. 
Matsushita, Japan's biggest electronics maker, has filed for several hundred patents this year for such ideas as superconducting television screens and washing machines without motors. 

   "When a vital technology emerges, we make it a target and then make a concentrated effort to apply for patents," says Kiyoshi Taketoh, a research administrator for Mitsubishi Electric. 

   Companies concede that the bulk of their patent applications, especially those for practical uses, are still at the theoretical stage. 
Nippon Telegraph &amp; Telephone Corp. has applied for patents on a superconducting chip that detects light. 
The company doesn't have a working model. 
But, says NTT executive manager Yuzo Katayama, the applications "are good insurance." 

   Indeed, some companies evaluate researchers' performance, in part, by how many patents they file. 
Many companies have patent-application drives with prizes for new ideas. 
"Even line workers and office workers are coming up with patent ideas," says Yoichiro Yamaguchi, a deputy director at Japan's patent office. 

   Japan's patent system itself is partly to blame for the patent stampede. 
Under Japanese law, a patent goes to the first person to file an application, not to the person who proves he first had the idea, which is the rule in the U.S. 
If two parties make the same invention, the one who gets to the patent office first gets the patent. 

   "When technology is moving so fast," as it is with superconductivity, says Hitoshi Watanabe, a patent officer, "whether you file today or whether you filed yesterday can make the difference." 

   Furthermore, Japan's two-step application process lets inventors apply and pay the initial 14,000-yen ($98) fee, and then decide within seven years whether to push the application through and pay the remaining fee of at least 60,000 yen. 
The system encourages inventors to rush to the patent office with half-baked ideas just to get first claim should the ideas ever amount to anything. 
Only about half of patent applications result in patents. 

   The flood of patent applications is partly defensive. 
In the case of superconductivity, Japanese companies are especially worried about rivals such as IBM and American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. 
The Japanese fear that IBM, which discovered the new ceramic superconductor last year, already may have applied for broad patents covering the ingredients and characteristics of the new superconducting ceramics. 
Those patents would give the giant U.S. company first crack at patents covering the same territory in Japan. 

   With such broad patents, the Japanese argue, companies here would have to get licenses from American rivals no matter how innovative Japan's applications are. 

   "We see possible problems in basic patents on materials," says Mr. Taketoh, the Mitsubishi Electric official. 
"Japanese companies are most worried about patents in materials. 
What patents will IBM take out? 
That's the question." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
