ID: 105	RANK: 70	SCORE: 5.267566
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870603-0089 </DOCNO>
<HL> GE Gives Consumer Electronics a Chance to Change
---
Barely Profitable, Unit Has Three
Years at Most to Show Turnaround
---
By Janet Guyon
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GE
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   When General Electric Co. bought RCA Corp. a year ago, it got a top-rated television network, a defense business and a service company. 
It also got something Chairman John F. Welch Jr. didn't want: the No. 1 position in color television sets, with an estimated 23% of the U.S. market. 

   The combination with RCA made consumer electronics -- primarily televisions and videocassette recorders -- GE's fifth-largest revenue producer, excluding financial services. 
But the business, which barely broke even last year, doesn't fit into Mr. Welch's vision of GE as the world's most profitable technology, services and manufacturing company. 

   "Consumer electronics really isn't General Electric," says Mr. Welch. 
"It's not part of our strategy. 
When we bought RCA, it wasn't even part of the analysis." 

   But Mr. Welch decided to give it another chance after consultant studies GE commissioned a year ago recommended a host of moves that could make the combined businesses competitive. 
To overhaul the business, Mr. Welch last July tapped Richard W. Miller, head of RCA's consumer electronics and records business since 1985, giving Mr. Miller two to three years to turn consumer electronics around. 
Mr. Miller, now a GE senior vice president, intends to use automation and workforce reductions to bring consumer electronics profits up to snuff. 

   It won't be easy. 
Like many other U.S. manufacturing industries, consumer electronics has been hurt by Far Eastern competitors, whose product innovations have been coupled with price slashing that has squeezed profits for everyone. 

   That's one reason the business defies the GE axiom that a business that ranks No. 1 in market share should be extremely profitable. 
The combined RCA and GE consumer electronics businesses, which posted $3.5 billion in revenue last year, or more than 10% of GE's total, barely broke even, not including about $150 million in income from licensing RCA patents. 
In Mr. Welch's view, consumer electronics' main job is to give GE greater buying clout for its other business in the Pacific Rim by adding to the volume of components purchased there. 

   Despite the fact that Mr. Welch regards consumer electronics as something of an albatross, security analysts say that even if GE eventually exits TV-set manufacturing, it will continue to market consumer electronics because of the valuable GE brand recognition that benefits more profitable consumer lines, such as light bulbs and major appliances. 
And, by GE standards, the cost of upgrading consumer electronics plants -- some $50 million to $100 million a year -- isn't formidable. 

   Mr. Welch hopes Mr. Miller eventually can approximate the more than 20% return on investment achieved by Roger Schipke, senior vice president in charge of major appliances. 

   If he succeeds, Mr. Miller will have added tremendously to GE's image as a company committed to manufacturing in the U.S. 
He could also make it onto the list of candidates to succeed Mr. Welch, though some executive recruiters view that as unlikely because he didn't spend his entire career at GE. 

   A tall, lanky 46-year-old with a boyish grin, in his 11 months as a GE senior vice president Mr. Miller has adopted much of the fix, sell, or close-it mentality common at GE in the Welch era. 
His GE job, says Mr. Miller, is easily the most difficult he has ever held -- including his 12-year stint at Penn Central Corp., whose railroad unit went bankrupt in 1970, shortly after he joined the company fresh from Harvard University's graduate school of business. 

   "We don't deserve to be in the (GE) family and that is a useful lesson to remind us we can't be fat, dumb and happy," says Mr. Miller, who reports directly to Mr. Welch. 
"We are fighting for the survival of the business." 

   His moves thus far resemble those made at other troublesome GE units, such as lighting, locomotives and major appliances. 
The ranks of salaried workers will be cut to less than 6,000 by the end of this year from more than 7,900 a year ago, he says. 
Of 23 component, picture tube and TV assembly plants world-wide, Mr. Miller has announced closings of seven, affecting more than 3,000 salaried and hourly employees, including GE's old Portsmouth, Va., consumer electronics headquarters, which was moved to Indianapolis. 
GE probably will end up with 14 factories world-wide. 

   Promised access to GE's vast capital and managerial resources, Mr. Miller is putting $20 million into the old RCA TV assembly plant in Bloomington, Ind. 
He aims to use automation to cut costs below those of South Korean manufacturers, whose low-priced sets are invading the U.S. 
For managerial talent, he has raided other GE units, particularly the now hugely successful major appliance business. 

   "Fortunately, we've received incredible support," Mr. Miller says. 
"We are being given substantial capital -- all that we asked for in the factories -- and we are being given research and development" primarily through a five-year, $250 million contract with RCA's former David Sarnoff Research Center in Princeton, N.J., which GE donated to private research institute SRI International. 

   But some consultants think GE is spiffing up the factories to be sold to foreigners wary of U.S. protectionism. 
Robert Gerson, editorial director of Twice, a consumer electronics industry magazine, fears the giveaway of the Sarnoff labs means the end of consumer electronics innovations that made RCA famous and -- not incidentally -- created the huge flow of licensing income the business now reaps. 

   But Mr. Welch questions whether consumer electronics can benefit from the same cost-cutting measures that helped build appliances into one of GE's best profit centers. 
In electronics, GE's huge capital base isn't necessarily an advantage, given the ease at which competitors can set up TV manufacturing. 
Nor does electronics have as much control over distribution, which is increasingly dominated by big discount retailers. 

   "In consumer electronics, you've got 35 or 38 brands coming in from all over the world," says Mr. Welch. 
"Some countries are trying to get balance-of-payments benefits from them. 
There have been dumping charges constantly. 
At GE, we don't have an overwhelming competitive position, which we like to have; we like to have the competitive forces going our way. 
In consumer electronics, I'm not sure who has those at any one point in time. 
It's a very fluid situation." 

   Mr. Miller, fortunately, thrives on fluid situations. 
After business school, with a wife and newborn daughter, he took the lowest-paying job offer -- $19,000 a year -- working for Penn Central, whose big railroad unit was about to file for reorganization under the federal bankruptcy laws. 
"I always liked working on difficult situations," he says. 
"And I like going in the opposite direction of the crowd." 

   Mr. Miller says now his initial doubts about the GE takeover are nearly gone. 
The Sarnoff lab giveaway was inevitable, he says, as GE has major labs in Schenectady, N.Y. 
Some development work was moved to Indianapolis and GE did retain RCA patents and rights to important research on an interactive video system. 
Moreover, Mr. Miller doesn't expect any radically new consumer electronics innovations in the next few years as he concentrates on reducing manufacturing costs. 

   Besides automating, he has engaged the unions, primarily the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, in an efficiency drive, narrowly winning a vote at the Bloomington plant to cut job classifications from 30 to six, and limiting workers' freedom to take vacation days. 

   That will reduce wages for some and eventually lead to layoffs, says William Hacker, the local union business manager, but the trade-off was moving production of 500,000 GE sets from a Japanese maker to the Bloomington plant, which employs about 1,500 union workers. 
"Personally, I didn't like it," says Mr. Hacker of the concessions granted GE, "but in the real world out there, they will shut you down if you don't make a profit." 

   Joseph C. Gandolfo, who helped make GE's Louisville, Ky., dishwasher plant a showcase, hopes to work similar magic in Bloomington. 
The plant is two generations behind state-of-the-art manufacturing; of 12 production lines, only one is fully automated and that could stand improvement, such as making the plastic TV cabinets at the plant instead of shipping them in from Indianapolis, says Mr. Gandolfo. 
In all, he figures automating two more lines this year will pare costs by 20% to 30%. 

   Meanwhile, Martin J. Holleran, consumer electronics sales vice president and one of 20 executives recruited from the major appliance division, is reorganizing the sales force, dividing it into 12 regions, each with its own profit and loss responsibility. 
He hopes to reduce sales costs by 10% to 20%. 

   Another former appliance man, Richard E. James, is refining the image of the GE and RCA brands while increasing the ad budget 5% from last year. 
GE-brand TVs are low-priced sets, while RCA has a high-quality, innovative image, he says. 

   "We have got some very good people, two very good brands and good products and distribution," Mr. Miller says. 
"If we get the financial returns to where they should be, the business qualifies in every other respect to be a member of the GE family." 

   ---

             Consumer Electronics Leaders
                By U.S. Market Share
 Company                   Brands              Share
 COLOR TELEVISIONS
 General Electric          GE, RCA               23%
 Zenith Electronics        Zenith                17
 North American Philips*   Magnavox, Philco,     11
                           Sylvania
 Sony Corp. of America     Sony                   7
 VIDEOCASSETTE RECORDERS
 General Electric          GE, RCA               17
 Matsushita                Panasonic, Quasar     13
 Sanyo Electric            Sanyo, Fisher         11
 Emerson                   Emerson                6
 *Majority owned by Dutch Philips N.V.
 Source: TWICE (This Week in Consumer Electronics) magazine

</TEXT>
</DOC>
