ID: 105	RANK: 73	SCORE: 5.252836
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880930-0010 </DOCNO>
<HL> Europeans Gamble on Movie-Quality TV --- Japanese Effort Isn't Certain; Lesson for U.S.? </HL>
<AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> JAPAN EUROP </CO>
<IN> TEL ELE </IN>
<DATELINE> BRIGHTON, England  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The screening room lights dim. 
All eyes are fixed on 18 television sets showing the changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace. 
The guardsmen's bearskin hats shimmer, their red coats gleam, their highly polished boots sparkle. 
The closed-circuit television pictures are movie quality. 

   "Hey, it works," whispers a voice in French as the demonstration ends. 
The relief in the screening room is palpable. 

   Relief because the futuristic television sets and cameras used to capture the changing of the guard represent a $220 million come-from-behind gamble by Europe that it can survive in the world consumer-electronics marketplace. 

   Industry groups in Europe, Japan and the U.S. are maneuvering to ensure that their distinctive technology for high-definition television, or HDTV, wins the race for a market estimated at anywhere from $20 billion a year to $100 billion a year by the year 2005. 

   The Brighton demonstration means the Europeans haven't lost yet. 
But everyone at the broadcasters' convention in Brighton this week knows winning won't be easy. 
That Europe is behind Japan is clear. 
Across the seafront promenade at the Odeon Cinema, Sony Corp. is demonstrating movie-quality, big-screen TV pictures transmitted (something the Europeans can't do yet) from London. 

   The competition is important to the U.S., even though no American companies showed HDTV wares in Brighton; a European victory could point the way for a U.S. electronics industry revival. 

   Brighton is just an early skirmish in a battle to upgrade and replace the world's 750 million television sets. 
World-wide standards for HDTV won't be set until at least 1990. 
Regular HDTV broadcasts won't begin for at least 10 years, though the Japanese are sending test pictures from the Seoul Olympics to a few sets in Japan. 

   Eventually, industry forecasters say, television sets featuring movie-quality pictures and compact-disc-quality stereo sound will replace existing sets as inexorably as color replaced black-and-white. 
A recent report prepared for the U.S. National Telecommunications and Information Administration says HDTV could create 100,000 U.S. jobs, 350,000 jobs worldwide. 
Not only would billions of sophisticated semiconductors and microchips be needed, but HDTV byproducts might find use in medicine, computer-aided design, telecommunications, spy satellites and education, its backers say. 

   "This will be by far the most important consumer electronics product for the next 20 years," says Charles Salzmann, technical adviser to French president Francois Mitterrand. 
Mr. Salzmann says Europe, by acting together with government backing for a consumer product, has finally "Japanized" itself. 
He thinks the U.S. government and electronics companies should do the same with HDTV. 

   Pat Hill Hubbard, an American Electronics Association vice president, agrees. 
"It isn't just a question of a new TV set to make couch potatoes more starchy," she says. 
"It's a fundamental new technology; if we don't play today, we'll have a hard time playing tomorrow." 

   Simply put, the new technology increases the number of lines displayed on a television tube, giving a denser, sharper, picture. 
Most HDTV picture tubes are wider than they are high, like a movie screen. 
HDTV also would allow one picture with eight sound channels, permitting viewers to watch, say, a European Evening News in any of eight languages. 

   Japanese makers are already selling transitional "enhanced definition" sets and European makers say they will have similar sets on the market this year. 
But real high-definition television won't be in place until at least 1995. 
The first HDTV sets could cost about $4,000 to $5,000 each, though prices will drop as the system catches on. 

   In Europe and the U.S., HDTV would double the number of lines in a TV picture, to 1,050 lines per screen in the U.S. and 1,250 lines in Europe. 
Both these systems would be "compatible" with existing television sets, just as color broadcasts are compatible with black-and-white sets. 
Both could broadcast existing television programs. 
HDTV broadcasts would appear on older sets but without much improvement in picture or sound. 

   The Japanese chose a separate path. 
The HDTV system being developed by several Japanese companies broadcasts 1,125 lines, can't be watched on existing sets, and can't broadcast existing programs. 
Just as Japanese makers gambled successfully that hi-fi buffs would ditch phonographs for higher-quality compact-disc players, the Japanese hope to capture a completely new TV market. 

   That gamble now looks doubtful. 
The U.S. Federal Communications Commission has issued a preliminary ruling that HDTV technology for the U.S. must be compatible with existing TVs, thus ruling out the major proposed Japanese system. 
"The Japanese hopes for dominance are finished," says a European TV official. 
"The U.S. decided not to commit suicide." 

   But the Japanese haven't given up. 
Other proposed Japanese systems would work with current U.S. television formats, and Japanese HDTV makers have given equipment, using the incompatible standard, to U.S. program makers. 
CBS Inc., which backed the incompatible Japanese system, will broadcast a made-for-TV movie in HDTV this season. 
Last week, Japan's state broadcasting company, NHK, offered to sell its HDTV technology at cost to anybody who wanted it, in return for acceptance of the Japanese standard. 
Europe rejected the offer, and the FCC isn't likely to back down on compatibility. 

   Despite the FCC ruling, the U.S. HDTV picture remains cloudy. 
About 20 HDTV systems are being developed in the U.S.; eight prototypes were displayed in the House Caucus Room in Washington this month. 
An FCC panel will eventually recommend a single U.S. contender. 

   According to HDTV backers, the question for the U.S. isn't if HDTV will succeed, but when, and who will make the equipment. 
Given the prominence of Japanese makers in the U.S. and the fact that Thomson S.A. of France owns the RCA and General Electric brands, while N.V. Philips of Holland owns North American Philips, there seems little room left for U.S. manufacturers. 

   "We've come late to the party," concedes Richard Wiley, the former FCC chairman who is heading an FCC advisory commission on HDTV. 
"But the U.S. is the biggest market in the world, and it's important for U.S. manufacturers to have some sort of role. 
It will be a decision for the next president and the next Congress on whether they want to make this a manon-the-moon sort of national priority." 

   It already is in Europe. 
Flush with new optimism stemming from the drive to remove West European trade barriers by the end of 1992, Europe has seized on HDTV as an electronic life preserver, a way to thwart the Japanese menace and conquer its own bad habits at the same time. 
"European electronics companies would invent a new product, and then six of them would each make it and kill each other, while the Japanese grabbed the market," says Mr. Salzmann, President Mitterrand's adviser. 
"This time we're not going to let it happen." 

   Europe's coordinated HDTV effort, which will cost 200 million European Currency Units ($220 million) over four years, is headed by TV makers Philips, Thomson and Robert Bosch G.m.b.H. of West Germany. 
It began soon after Europe managed in 1986 to postpone for four years the world-wide adoption of the Japanese HDTV standard, giving Europe time to produce a creditable HDTV system of its own. 

   Political backing has been solid. 
French centrist Simone Veil calls HDTV "a battle Europe must win." 
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, despite second thoughts on European unity, dispatched her trade minister to speak before the HDTV cameras at Brighton. 
European officials insist that whatever happens in Japan and the U.S., their system will be used in Europe. 
They also note that while the European system won't work in the U.S., it is more easily convertible to U.S. standards than is the Japanese system. 

   The next step is to generate more and better European programs to show on the fancy new sets. 
European television schedules are littered with Hollywood movies, "I Love Lucy" and "Dallas." 
Pan-European production efforts generally result in endless evenings of bad pop music or Dallas knock-offs set in a French vineyard or German health spa. 

   "The stakes are political, economic and cultural," says Michel Carpentier, head of the European Community department that is helping coordinate the HDTV effort. 
"Europe can't have imposed on us a Japanese TV system so that we can show American soap operas." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
