ID: 105	RANK: 84	SCORE: 5.173500
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881114-0176 </DOCNO>
<HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Challenge --- Harvesting the American Mind: Japan Scouts U.S. Labs and Small Firms For the Seeds of New Products </HL>
<AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> JAPAN </CO>
<IN> TRA ELE EDP </IN>
<DATELINE> HYUGA, Japan  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   At 100 miles an hour, the bullet-shaped train lifts off, floating above its roadbed on a three-inch cushion of air. 
At 200 miles an hour, the passenger car begins to rock gently back and forth. 
Suddenly the ride is over. 

   Every day, the levitating train runs through its paces here at the Miyazaki test track in southwestern Japan -- four miles out and four miles back. 
Engineers in uniforms and hardhats are everywhere, many maintaining the technological heart of the levitating train: its roadbed of specially cooled superconducting magnets. 
When the engineers aren't testing, they are dreaming -- dreaming about the 1990s, when they hope to string track between cities and carry ordinary passengers at 300 miles an hour. 

   The Japanese government has sunk more than $200 million into this train, with much more to come and no payback in sight. 
Technical problems remain. 
German competition is on the horizon. 
The Japanese have no idea whether anyone will want to build a commercial version of their train, or if built, whether anyone will want to ride it. 

   The levitating train is an enormous gamble, and that's exactly the point. 
Japan is no longer playing the timid copycat. (The U.S. ended research into magnetic-levitating trains in 1975.) 
Japan is now moving on to become an innovator and pioneer, anxious to investigate new technology, ready to bankroll some pretty far-fetched ideas. 

   "Ten years ago, it was enough to latch onto something 100% proven," says Shoji Kumagai, general manager of technical development at giant Sumitomo Corp. "Today we have to grab it at the idea stage." 

   Grabbing the nascent idea and commercializing it, ahead of the U.S. and Europe, is a large part of Japan's strategy for the 1990s and beyond. 
Its long-range plans cover the gamut of high technology, from building robots that mix chemicals in outer space to dredging the bottom of the sea for precious minerals. 

   Of course there is collaboration between U.S. and Japanese interests at times, or mutual exploitation. 
But it is also true that in one important field after another, Japan is on a collision course with the U.S. 
Its industrial targets are the same targets the U.S. has -- supercomputers, software, genetically engineered products, custom semiconductor chips, ceramics and even aerospace. 

   Japanese technology tactics will look familiar to anybody who remembers the U.S. Apollo moon-shot project of the 1960s. 
The overall Japanese effort resembles hundreds of miniature Apollo projects, with highly focused targets, severe timetables, heavy financial investment and unwavering support from the Japanese government. 

   Yet despite all the high-powered programs and the increasing money spent on blue-sky research, Japan still doesn't have a strong base of home-grown advanced technology. 
Strong in development and weak in research, this has been a Japanese problem for a long time. 
It remains one today. 

   What is Japan to do? 

   ---
   IN HIS DANIA, Fla., laboratory, William E. Glenn, lifelong inventor and holder of 104 patents, is voicing his frustration. 
He had tried so hard to get American manufacturers interested in his work. 
For 10 years he had been developing a TV projector that would deliver the sharpness and clarity of 35 millimeter film. 
But no American company seemed to be interested in his obsession with what's called high-definition television. 

   "I raised the red flag, visited congressmen, senators, the White House, industry," says Mr. Glenn. 
"I couldn't get anybody interested." 

   In the U.S., that is. 
But people from overseas were definitely interested. 
In came West German, French, Korean and Japanese engineers. 
One Japanese engineer came through and photographed every square inch of Mr. Glenn's basement laboratory. 
The most serious interest came from Sony Corp., which was hard at work on the new generation of TV gear. 
It sent engineers, middle managers and, early this year, Deputy President Masahiko Morizono. 

   And so began another chapter in what has become a familiar story. 
It might be called The Harvesting of the American Mind. 

   In the first decades after World War II, Japanese businessmen with their cameras and notebooks and endless questions became a fixture at big American companies. 
It was often a matter of weak little Japanese companies picking the brains of big, strong American companies. 

   Today, Japanese companies have already harvested much of America's big-company technology. 
Now, they are buying into small American high-technology firms. 

   Sanyo Electric, the Japanese electronics firm, recently acquired 60% of Icon Systems &amp; Software Inc., a Utah microcomputer concern, for $5.6 million. 
Sanyo is developing office computers based on Icon's technologies.In 1986 and 1987, in the electronics field alone, big Japanese companies invested in more than 20 small U.S. firms. 
Such equity interests give the Japanese companies access to a steady flow of research and technology that might otherwise be proprietary. 

   Kubota Ltd., for example, has poured about $75 million into some of Silicon Valley's hottest companies, including MIPS Computer Systems and Ardent Computer. 
What's a Japanese tractor maker doing in Silicon Valley? 
Kubota is learning how to make a supercomputer-based workstation for engineers, and recently began selling the product in Japan. 
Kubota engineers are also learning to handle these state-of-the art machines, which will give them the power to design for themselves a new tractor, for example, with a smaller turning radius. 

   Japanese companies are also mounting what amounts to a full-scale invasion of another source of ideas: American universities. 
Japanese companies have endowed 16 professorial chairs at Massachusetts Institute of Technology alone. 
According to one recent Japanese study, 42 Japanese companies are donating money to MIT, 11 companies to California Institute of Technology, 10 companies to Columbia. 
Other top university recipients include Cornell, Princeton, New York University and Pennsylvania State University. 

   NEC Corp. as one example, began donating money to MIT in the 1970s. 
One donation of $1 million went to create a "C&amp;C software professorship." 
C&amp;C is the NEC corporate slogan; it stands for computers and communications. 

   What does NEC get for its money? 
People who can solve its problems. 
NEC personnel are studying at MIT, but there is a reverse flow, too. 
MIT's C&amp;C professor was invited to NEC's central research laboratory in Japan, says Masateru Takagi, who spent eight years in NEC's office near Boston. 

   Japanese companies are also tapping U.S. science by opening labs in America and hiring droves of American scientists and engineers. 
Kyocera has a research lab in San Diego. 
Ohtsuka Pharmaceutical has one in Seattle. 
Japanese auto companies are beefing up U.S.-based R&amp;D, and it's an open secret that Fujitsu, the big computer company, is planning to build a big research facility in the U.S. 

   Fujitsu already has 700 employes in Silicon Valley. 
After being rejected by several U.S. chipmakers, Sun Microsystems, one Valley company, turned to Fujitsu to help design and build the Sparc chip, one of the hottest new computer products. 
This enabled Fujitsu to hit the market first with the advanced chip. 
In addition Fujitsu owns 45% of Amdahl Corp.'s stock. 

   One of the most potentially lucrative of all the technological frontiers now being invaded by Japan is high-definition television. 
The U.S. Commerce Department estimates that this development alone may be a $20 billion a year consumer business by the mid-1990s.The Japanese National Broadcasting Network has been working on the new format since 1970, and the big Japanese TV-set makers have been working on the consumer gear for years. 
A test of the new technology was broadcast back to Japan from the Summer Olympics in Seoul. 

   But why isn't anybody in the U.S. interested? 
As Mr. Glenn, the Florida inventor, can testify, there is hardly anybody left in the U.S. TV manufacturing business. 
Most of the great names of yesteryear, such as RCA, Magnavox and Sylvania, have been sold to foreign interests or have moved offshore. 

   All of this has strategists back in Tokyo worrying. 
As America has dropped out of manufacturing televisions, it has also largely abandoned television research. 
If this keeps happening in one industry after another, where will the seeds of new technologies come from? 
At least some of them will have to sprout at home, in Japan. 

   ---
   KEN HAYASHIBARA IS a billionaire, thanks to Japan's escalating land prices. 
He is pouring a lot of his money into an enterprise that has been unusual up until now -- a company whose principal activity is basic research. 

   The company is Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratories Inc., which currently has only about $40 million in sales but almost unlimited financial resources to call upon. 
It has few of the fuddy-duddy regulations of most Japanese companies -- the pins, the uniforms, the company songs. 
White-smocked researchers do attend a monthly ceremony, though, to commemorate the deaths of the thousands of hamsters who donate their lives to Hayashibara's research into leukemia. 

   Two years ago, the company succeeded in mass producing gamma interferon and tumor necrosis factor -- two promising new pharmaceuticals. 
Interferon is being developed in conjunction with the major Japanese drug house, Ohtsuka Pharmaceutical. 
Tumor necrosis factor, another cancer-killing substance, is being developed with Mochida Pharmaceutical Co. 
The idea is that Hayashibara will do basic research, leaving commercialization to the bigger Japanese companies. 

   Mr. Hayashibara says he is willing to take any amount of risk on research. 
"In the end, we may have developments that are like toys in a box. 
We close the lid. 
Someday maybe people will be interested. 
Maybe not." 

   This is a relatively new attitude in Japan. 
Bulging with cash from its tremendous commercial success over the past two decades, Japan is no longer willing just to pick the brains of foreign scientists and is rapidly developing a research capability of its own. 

   Its determination is evidenced in patent activity. 
Like the Oklahoma sooners of a century ago, the Japanese are rushing into undeveloped territory, putting down stakes. 
Japan is aggressively patenting its breakthroughs not only in Japan, but also in America. 
In 1980, Japanese were granted 6,626 patents in the U.S., just under 11% of the total. 
In 1987, the number had climbed to 17,140 U.S. patents, or more than 19% of all the patents issued in the U.S. last year. 

   Recent breakthroughs in superconductivity inspired a frenzy of patent filing. 
One company, Sumitomo Electric, filed more than 700 superconductivity-patent applications, swamping the Japanese patent office. 

   Many of these patents are the result of research that is highly focused and frequently channeled through the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI). 
The U.S. has no counterpart to MITI, which can harness diverse segments of Japan industry into a single coordinated and sustained technological effort. 

   The results of such highly channeled and focused research have already been devastating to U.S. companies. 

   For example, in the 1970s, the Japanese government launched its very large scale integrated circuit project -- an effort to become the leader in making high-performance memory chips for computers, a field the U.S. created and in which it led the world. 

   The U.S. leads no longer. 
Today, the Chip War is raging on 26 different fronts, each representing an effort to dominate markets in a certain product or process. 
According to one recent report prepared for the National Security Council and the cabinet, the U.S. is ahead of Japan in six battles, the two countries are dead even in six battles, and the U.S. is behind in 14 battles. 

   Worse, the U.S. position is weakening. 
The group of experts, who came from the departments of State, Defense and Commerce, the National Science Foundation, the Central Intelligence Agency and others, concluded that the U.S. is losing ground in 21 of these battles. 
It is holding its own in only five. 
The U.S. position wasn't improving in a single category. 

   The ferocious competition in chips has caused years of hardship at Intel, Motorola and many other American producers. 
It has also put American supercomputer companies at a tremendous disadvantage in their own struggle to develop their machines. 

   Supercomputers have spread rapidly. 
In the beginning, they were used largely for weather forecasting and advanced scientific tasks. 
Today, they are increasingly a competitive weapon used by industry, and the market is growing about 30% a year. 

   The Japanese have muscled their way into the business. 
Back in 1982, MITI began an eight-year, $170 million supercomputer project. 
Today, Japanese supercomputer makers are gaining on their U.S. rivals. 
NEC in particular is regarded as a strong competitor, and is putting most of its resources into the biggest number-crunching monsters of all, machines that sell in the range of $20 million apiece. 

   At the same time they face this kind of Japanese competition, American supercomputer makers are forced to turn to these Japanese giants -- NEC Corp., Hitachi Ltd. and Fujitsu Ltd. -- for their supplies of high-performance memory chips. 

   "I'd love to build a machine with 100% U.S. parts," says Carl Ledbetter, until a recent reassignment the president of ETA Systems, a Control Data unit and supercomputer maker. 
"But in the most advanced chips we need, we have only Japanese suppliers. 
And in the more-standard items, American firms are only getting into products that the Japanese have supplied for two years." 
Mr. Ledbetter says Japanese chip makers are at least 18 months ahead of their U.S. rivals in certain memory products. 

   Japanese companies are also moving aggressively in a field where, up until now, America has had no peer -- the design of computer software. 
In the U.S., software has flourished as something of a cottage industry; in Japan, companies have set up software factories with 1,000 employees or more. 

   "Maybe it isn't the equivalent of Michaelangelo," says Michael Cusumano, assistant professor at the Sloan School of Management at MIT. 
"But the big Japanese companies are excellent at producing complicated software. 
They do it quickly. 
The bugs are minimal. 
Their productivity is very good." 
Mr. Cusumano pauses to reflect on the similarities to Japanese competitive challenges of the past and says, "It all sounds frighteningly familiar." 

   ---
   AT ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY in New York, President Joshua Lederberg is concerned about the flood of Japanese researchers. 
Rockefeller is educating Japanese scientists, a growing number of whom are going back to Japan, entering the commercial sphere and competing against American pharmaceutical houses. 

   He wants Japanese researchers because they are talented, but he doesn't want to foot the entire bill for them. 
Rockefeller is funding 34 post-doctoral scientists from Japan at a cost is over $1 million a year, yet the school gets less than $200,000 from Japanese government and industry. 
Dr. Lederberg says, "Japan isn't even beginning to pull its fair share of the load." 

   Others have their own reasons for being wary of Japan's increasing presence at U.S. universities, companies and laboratories. 
This developing wariness leads some to believe that just as trade friction dominated the U.S.-Japan agenda in the 1980s, science and technology frictions will dominate their relationship in the 1990s. 

   Why does Japan risk such a backlash when it has been so successful in so many large, established industries? 
Why isn't it content to stick to its knitting? 

   Japanese industrialists say they have no choice but to leap into new technologies, whether this brings them into conflict with the U.S. or not. 
They feel their dominance in manufacturing is in jeopardy, as South Korea, Taiwan, Brazil and other countries challenge Japan in autos, steel, consumer electronics, chemicals and elsewhere. 

   But the Japanese rankle at the charge that they are freeloading on American science. 
"Japan isn't free riding. 
It's mostly a matter of buying up," says Atsushi Shimokobe, president of Japan's National Institute for Research Advancement. 
"Science and technology are more interlocked, and Japanese business is trying to buy the world's best science and scientists." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
