ID: 176	RANK: 46	SCORE: 4.521914
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870811-0108 </DOCNO>
<HL> SHOP TALK:
Turn That Frown
Upside Down
---
By Jonathan Dahl, Jeffrey A. Tannenbaum
And Joseph B. White</HL>
<DD> 08/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT CRZY DAL F
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
AIRLINES (AIR)
AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Delta Air Lines insists it can take a joke as well as anybody. 
But some radio executives aren't so sure. 

   After the airline's recent spate of publicized incidents, many radio morning shows began lampooning the episodes. 
WHTZ-FM in New York came out with its own version of the song "Delta Dawn." (The opening refrain: Delter why can't your pilots learn to fly?/Near misses do not make for friendly skies.) 
In Philadelphia, WSNI-FM played a mock recording of a conversation in an airline cockpit. 

   "We had this pilot carrying on with a stewardess when a jet goes whizzing by," says Don Cannon, host of the station's morning show. 
"It was supposed to be funny." 

   Shortly afterward, the stations say, Delta's advertising broker yanked the airline's commercials from both stations. 
The broker also sent a letter to more than 20 other stations threatening similar action. 
While confirming the letter, Delta says it was unauthorized. 
The carrier also says that it cancelled some commercials only to lower its profile. 

   "We were waiting for some of the storm to die down," a Delta spokesman says. 
"It's not like we don't have a sense of humor." 

   Crazy Numbers
   Here's a piece of investment advice: Don't ignore the typographical errors. 

   A recent profile of securities analyst Thornton L. O'glove on this page noted that the maverick analyst had beaten mainstream securities analysts in steering investors away from Crazy Eddie Inc., an electronics retail chain whose financial results have deteriorated this year. 

   In the case of Crazy Eddie, Mr. O'glove said he noted, among other things, that for the quarter ended Aug. 31, 1986, sales from stores open a year or more were up only 5% from the same period in 1985; by contrast, sales in the 1985 period had jumped 20% from 1984. 
Mr. O'glove was disturbed by the 5% figure -- and told his clients about it. 

   Well, it seems that the 5% figure was a typographical error by Crazy Eddie in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing; the correct figure, according to a Crazy Eddie spokesman, was 15%. 

   But don't worry: Mr. O'glove says he also noticed that inventories were out of control as well. 
"I would have written (the negative report) on inventories alone," he says. 

   Hello, Honda?
   Ford Motor Co. Chairman Donald E. Petersen recently had cause to wonder whether one of his company's better ideas is really so good after all. 

   Mr. Petersen was in Traverse City, Mich., to give a speech to the National Governor's Conference, and the conference organizers sent a Lincoln Town car around to the airport to pick him up. 

   But as Mr. Petersen climbed in, the car conked out. 

   Mr. Petersen got to deliver his speech -- on the need to restore American competitiveness. 
His aides, meanwhile, got the task of figuring out why Mr. Petersen's top-of-the-line product failed to perform. 

   The failure was the fault of a baggage handler who was pitching Mr. Petersen's luggage into the car's trunk, says Ford vice president for public relations David Scott. 
Somehow, he says, the baggage loader managed to trip an optional fuel cut-off switch tucked up inside the trunk. 
The switch is designed to prevent gasoline spills after a collision. 

   "The guy threw the bag in, and the car went off," says Mr. Scott. 
"I've never heard of it happening before." 

   Fortunately for Mr. Petersen, there was another Ford at the airport, which is why the chairman arrived at the governor's conference in an Aerostar van. 

   Odds &amp; Ends
   Donald Shackelford, chairman of State Savings Bank in Columbus, Ohio, says the federal savings and loan examiners that were "loaned" to Texas last year to help uncover excesses in Texas have returned to Ohio. 
"Now we've got all these guys sitting around telling war stories about time-sharing condos on Lake Conroe," near Houston, says Mr. Shackelford. 
"They want you to sign affidavits about how many company cars you've got and they ask you 'where's your French chef?'" . . . 
Thomas Nelson Inc., a Nashville company that publishes Bibles and "other inspirational literature," issues a press release attributing a decline in fiscal first-quarter revenue to "the exodus of certain unprofitable products and product lines . . .." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
