ID: 176	RANK: 65	SCORE: 4.370119
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890816-0113 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890816 </DD>
<AN> 890816-0113. </AN>
<HL> Letters to the Editor:
@  Happy Birthday to You (Emended) </HL>
<DD> 08/16/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<TEXT>
   Your reproduction of the first Wall Street Journal of July 8, 1889, reflected an annual subscription price of $5. 

   I couldn't resist calculating the annual compounded increase over 100 years, to the current price of $129 a year. 
It works out to about a 3.3% average annual increase. 

   Sounds reasonable to me. 
I think I'll keep my subscription for a while. 
Happy 100th birthday. 

   Irwin Fischman 

   Northfield, Ill. 

   ---

   Your advertisement, welcoming all who come upon it to the Journal's second century, carries the illustration of a champagne cork traveling forcefully upward after having been pried loose from the bottle assumably by thumb pressure. 

   The opening of a bottle of champagne is appropriate. 
However, for a publication for which a new Simmons study shows readers representing "the highest quality demographic profile" I am curious as to why the cork is shown being removed in a way individuals representing so high a demographic profile would find gauche and incorrect. 

   The cork of a bottle of fine or even inexpensive champagne is properly removed by being grasped firmly by a clenched hand while the bottle is turned slowly by the other hand -- to the right or to the left -- and the cork gradually lifted free with only a muted pop and no explosive loss of as much as a few bubbles. 
The bottle, in effect, is removed slowly from the cork. 

   It may not be as noisy or as much fun, but it is less messy and considerably more economical. 

   Walter Weir 

   Newtown, Pa. 

   ---

   Your June 23 Centennial edition said that the pneumatic tire was invented for bicycles in 1888 by a British physician John Dunlop. 
I think that John Dunlop was not a physician, but a veterinarian. 
In England they do not call veterinarians Dr. but call them Mr. 

   Samuel H. Wood Jr. DVM 

   Honolulu 

   ---

   I was born in 1901, so I have lived most of the same years as The Wall Street Journal. 
After reading the Centennial Edition, I think it was about as accurate a history of these times as is likely to be published. 
Robert E. Jacobsen 

   Minneapolis 

   ---

   There you go again] In your centennial "mea culpa" "The Sad Truth . . ." while confessing your preoccupation with Vietnam watermelons the day Tet broke, you re-lay the egg regarding the "seizure by the Viet Cong" of the U.S. Embassy in Saigon. 
On Jan. 31, 1968, 19 VCs attacked the embassy at 3 a.m. by blowing a hole in the perimeter wall and entering the yard. 
Three Marine guards stopped them, killing their leader. 
Subsequently, the rest were mopped up. 
At no time did any Viet Cong gain entrance to the building. 
The "seizure" occurred only when we abandoned the building and the country. 

   This event was reported and re-reported as that "seizure by the Viet Cong," including the baloney that the inside of the building was littered with bodies. 
It's time you straighten this one out, too. 

   Gene Oathout 

   Vero Beach, Fla. 

   ---

   I read with great interest your June 20 Centennial article, "Unthinkable Heart Surgery Opens an Era, 1944." 
If reported accurately, apparently Drs. 
Helen B. Taussig and Alfred Blalock were not the first to perform successful heart surgery. 

   On Oct. 25, 1944, Dr. Rollie Daniels performed heart surgery on me at Vanderbilt Hospital in Nashville, Tenn. 
Dr. Amos Christy was director of the children's hospital at that time. 
The surgery was performed a few days before my fifth birthday on Nov. 1, 1944. 
I remember that the first solid food I was allowed were my birthday cake and ice cream. 
I, too, was a "blue baby." 
I understand that I was the second patient on whom Dr. Daniels performed this surgery, but the first longterm survivor. 

   The surgery was complicated by the fact that I was allergic to sulfa drugs, so I was treated with another of Vanderbilt's cutting-edge medical practices, penicillin, which was then experimental. 
As a testament to the success of the procedure I now am able to live a very normal life. 
I have just completed a 50-mile hike of the High Sierra campgrounds in Yosemite, a feat far beyond the expectations of anyone who knew me as a child. 

   No day goes by without my appreciating the pioneering efforts of these outstanding physicians, and I want to make sure the record is straight about the first successful heart operation. 

   Virginia Rhea Blansett Langrehr 

   Omaha, Neb. 

   ---

   Your article on cardiac surgery as pioneered by Drs. 
Blalock and Taussig referred to Ms. Vivien Thomas as an important contributor to the introduction of modern cardiac surgery. 
Ms. Thomas is in fact Mr. Thomas, a black man who is revered at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions as a valuable contributor to Dr. Blalock's research efforts as a teacher of surgical techniques to hundreds of Hopkins-trained surgeons. 
The development of modern cardiac surgery and the careers of many Hopkins-trained physicians are due in part to the contributions of this remarkable man. 

   Stephen V. Neville M.D. 

   Corvallis, Ore. 

   ---

   The Centennial Edition section on inventions contains a reference to Japan inventing the transistor radio in 1955. 

   The transistor radio was invented by the Regency Co., an American firm. 
How quickly we forget. 

   Frederick Matos 

   Annapolis, Md. 

   ---

   Your 100th edition had some facts wrong. 
MCI was not founded by William McGowan. 
That credit belongs to John Goeken, who ran a small aircraft radio repair shop in Joliet, Ill., and flew a beat-up Piper Cub as a hobby. 

   As district sales manager for General Electric two-way radios in Chicago in the 1960s, I was looking for a sales-service rep in Joliet. 
John wasn't much of a salesman (I thought), but his service was good. 
John and the Chicago rep wanted to sell radios to motor carriers that needed communications between Chicago and St. Louis. 
Two-way radios didn't have that kind of coverage and one answer was a microwave link between these cities. 
Everyone knew AT&amp;T held an ironbound monopoly on this service -- everyone, that is, except John Goeken, who flew his Piper Cub to Washington, banged on the FCC's door and demanded a microwave license. 

   To the utter amazement of the communications worLd, the FCC granted John a license. 
He was besieged immediately with offers of money, equipment and manpower by industry moguls who sensed the lucrative bonanza he had opened. 

   Enter Mr. McGowan and friends. 
They eventually bought out the country lad and took over. 

   There is a compelling reason why Mr. McGowan would never have founded MCI. Like all the rest of us at the time, he was knowledgeable enough to know that the FCC would never grant a microwave license to a small commercial operation. 

   Jack Najork 

   Duncanville, Texas 

   ---

   In Jerry Bishop's piece on modern-day advances, the development and marketing of synthetic Adrenalin is ascribed incorrectly to three unnamed scientists and the German dye maker Farbwerke Hoechst. 

   In 1901, while working in cooperation with Parke, Davis &amp; Co., Dr. Jokichi Takamine first isolated and crystallized Adrenalin. 
It was then marketed under that trade name by Parke, Davis -- now a part of Warner-Lambert Co. 

   Dr. Takamine's discovery prompted the mayor of Tokyo to offer a gift of cherry trees to President William Howard Taft's wife, evident even now as the source of Washington's annual cherry-blossom explosion. 

   A major figure in the early history of American biotechnology, Dr. Takamine received the patent rights for his work on Adrenalin. 
At his death in 1922, he was said to be the most famous Japanese living in America. 
Peter Wolf 

   Media Relations 

   Warner-Lambert Co. 

   Morris Plains, N.J. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
