ID: 176	RANK: 72	SCORE: 4.315365
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870102-0062 </DOCNO>
<HL> FCC Weighs Rule Change to Allow GE,
Capital Cities/ABC to Retain Stations
---
By Rob Davis and Peter W. Barnes
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GE CCB NWS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The Federal Communications Commission is considering a rule change that would let Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and General Electric Co. keep radio stations the agency previously ordered them to sell. 

   James McKinney, chief of the FCC's mass media bureau, and FCC commissioner James Quello said the agency plans to propose a rule at its Jan. 15 meeting that would enable companies to own television stations and AM-radio stations in the same market. 

   The officials said it was unclear whether the agency would propose allowing TV broadcasters to own FM stations as well in the same city. 
FCC rules currently prohibit companies from owning television and radio stations in the same market in an effort to promote a diversity of opinion and economic competition. 

   American Broadcasting Cos. and National Broadcasting Co. were exempt from those cross-ownership rules because they both owned TV and radio properties in the same market before the rules went into effect. 
However, when Capital Cities purchased ABC, and General Electric acquired RCA Corp., parent of NBC, they were ordered to sell some radio stations. 

   Changing the cross-ownership rule has strong support on the five-member commission. 
FCC chairman Mark Fowler, in an earlier interview, said, "in most major markets it would be fine to own a television and AM-FM station." 
But he added that he might oppose such rule changes for small markets, where there are fewer media outlets. 

   Commissioner Quello on Wednesday indicated that he favored the rule change as a way to aid AM stations, which have been hurt by competition from FM stations and shrinking advertising. 
Mr. McKinney said the rule change grows out of a report that the agency released last spring highlighting the problems faced by AM stations. 

   The nation's 4,800 commercial AM radio stations currently command about 30% of the radio listening audience, while 3,900 commercial FM stations account for the rest. 
"Five years ago, it was more like 5050, and 10 years ago, 60-40," said Thomas J. Buono, president of Broadcast Investment Analysts Inc., a Washington, D.C., financial consulting firm. 
"There's been constant erosion." 

   But the expected decision has implications beyond AM radio. 
The agency has ordered publisher Rupert Murdoch to sell the New York Post by March 1988 under a similar cross-ownership rule banning companies from owning newspapers and TV stations in the same market. 
Mr. Murdoch also owns WNEW-TV in New York. 

   Robert Pepper, an aide to FCC commissioner Patricia Diaz Dennis, said the rule change could bolster Mr. Murdoch's argument if he tries to persuade the FCC to let him retain the Post. 
But Mr. Pepper and Mr. Quello doubted that the rule change alone would persuade the agency to grant such a request. 

   In addition, Laurence Tisch, chairman of Loews Corp. and acting chief executive officer of CBS, could be emboldened to raise Loews' CBS stake from 24.9% because of the rule change. 
Analysts have speculated that Mr. Tisch has limited Loews' CBS stake partly because he feared that the FCC would rule that he had gained control of CBS and order him to sell some radio and TV stations. 

   Earlier last year, the FCC ruled that control of CBS had not passed to New York-based Loews or Mr. Tisch. 

   Radio industry executives said the proposal makes Capital Cities' plans uncertain. 
The agency has ordered New York-based Capital Cities/ABC to sell four AM stations and three FM stations in four markets by July 1987. 
Now, the company may ask the agency for an extension of the sales deadline while the agency considers the proposal. 

   "If we decide to keep the AM stations, the FCC proposal would be a basis" for doing so, acknowledged one Capital Cities/ABC official. 
As for proposing ways to keep the FM stations, "that's a hard question," the official added. 

   Last month, talks between NBC and Pittsburgh-based Westinghouse Electric Co. over merging their respective radio operations into a new company collapsed. 

   After Fairfield, Conn.-based GE acquired RCA last year, NBC was required to sell two AM and three FM stations in three cities by December 1987. 
NBC officials declined comment Wednesday, but have said previously they were "pursuing other options." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
