ID: 176	RANK: 83	SCORE: 4.263232
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870520-0081 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Business Bookshelf:
Circuitry Is More Creative Than Poetry
---
By George Gilder</HL>
<DD> 05/20/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Fast Forward: Hollywood, the Japanese, and the VCR Wars" (Norton, 344 pages, $18.95), James Lardner's story on the videocassette recorder, spills forthlike the VCR itself -- a cornucopia of unexpected fruits. 
Some gleanings from this sprightly text, which is based on Mr. Lardner's New Yorker magazine series: 

   --Not only was the VCR an American invention but it was also an American consumer product two years before its introduction by Sony Corp. 
The collapse of venture capital in the early 1970s after the doubling of capital-gains taxes prevented Frank Stanton's pioneering Cartrivision from a successful launch of the product. 

   --Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry had little to do with the success of Japanese microelectronics. 
Driven by Sony's prowess with consumer products, Japan led in semiconductors as early as 1959, when it outproduced the U.S. in transistors. 
Japan did not fall behind until the U.S. entrepreneurial explosion of the mid-1960s. 
Japan remains behind today, producing less than 40% of the world's chips compared with America's 57%. 

   --Japan's triumph in VCRs largely sprang from more intense domestic competition. 
While the U.S. had only one producer -- Cartrivision -- the Japanese had eight major companies manufacturing the device. 
Nonetheless, it was RCA Corp., a pathetic failure in developing the product, that played the crucial role in defining and selling the VCR. 
By requiring Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. to abandon its two-hour format in favor of three- or four-hour formats, RCA gave the Japanese company the key to the American market with its focus on movies and sports events. 

   --Yet Japan was not the chief beneficiary of the VCR. Except by the narrow and largely irrelevant measure of the balance of trade, the U.S. gained far more than Japan. 
The U.S. dominated the larger business of selling the machines and creating software for them, from Jane Fonda's exercise tapes to the revitalization of Hollywood and the recovery of serious films that could no longer make it in the teen-dominated theaters. 

   Although Mr. Lardner does not himself draw any of these conclusions, his book provides an alert reader with a fine case study in recent industrial history. 
He excels in describing the technological marvels and delivers a superb account of the Japanese side of the story (though he exaggerates MITI's obstruction of Sony; Texas Instruments Inc. would have been first with the transistor radio regardless of MITI's delays). 
Mr. Lardner also splendidly describes the entrepreneurial carnival of the video-store upsurge, and he is masterful in setting up the confrontation between Japan's engineers and America's ubiquitous lawyers -- a confrontation that climaxed when Universal Pictures sued Sony in an attempt to stop the Betamax. 

   Nonetheless, "Fast Forward" is ultimately a disappointing book. 
The fruits of insight must be ferreted out from a stupefying mass of name-drops and dribbles from Washington society, biochaff on congressional aides and Supreme Court PR personnel, densely tedious accounts of legal pettifoggery, endless ambages of New Yorker fact-check clutter, long odes on the unctuous charm and silver locks of Jack Valenti, a galore of resumes of other leading lobbyists, and encomiums to the gruff working-class appeal of one Dean Dunlavey (Harvard, '47). 
As the liveliest American character in the book, Mr. Dunlavey epitomizes the American problem by gaining a Ph.D. from Berkeley in nuclear chemistry only to become just another rich and self-righteous legal windbag for one of "America's most respected law firms." 

   This book thus makes the mistake of describing the problems of American enterprise by exemplifying them. 
From a fascinating and revealing account of a superb new technology, the book fast forwards to a seemingly cynical but essentially obsequious tale of Washington politicians, judges, lawyers and various Big Names who for all their wealth and pomposity have nothing of interest on their minds and scarcely deserve to shine the shoes of Akio Morita of Sony and Konosuke Matsushit -- athough such services may well be the fate of American enterprise if the lawyers and judges continue to have their way. 

   Mr. Lardner's problem is that as a certifiable American intellectual, he cannot bring himself to endorse this technology he devotes a book to describing. 
Throughout he implies that the literary culture he represents and the legal and political culture he indulges are somehow superior to the technical and business culture that launched the VCR and other modern marvels and sustains the world economy. 

   Renouncing both religious and scientific values in favor of a statist and egalitarian mush, however, prevailing segments of the American legal profession and the arts community have become swollen parasites that threaten the survival of their host. 
They resent the vitality of the technical culture and feed on it. 
They are disdainful toward the values of enterprise and full of vain professional pretense and pedantry. 
Neither the courts nor the arts have done anything in recent decades that compares in artistry, beauty or creative significance with the microelectronics of a VCR. 

   ---
   Mr. Gilder writes frequently on technology-related issues. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
