ID: 176	RANK: 85	SCORE: 4.251367
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881103-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL>
<AUTHOR> Janet Guyon </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> MOT T ERICY NT IMMC ICGI ATW </CO>
<IN> TEL CON ELE EDP </IN>
<TEXT>
      Boosting Efficiency
   Of Cellular Phones
   CELLULAR phone systems have made talking from cars so popular that networks in cities such as New York and Los Angeles are near capacity. 
That has the industry searching for ways to squeeze more conversations into the limited range of frequency allotted each city. 

   Responding to requests from the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, makers of cellular equipment are developing systems that send digital rather than analog signals between base stations and car phones. 
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co.'s Bell Laboratories demonstrated its digital technology last March in Chicago: A computer analyzed a voice, digitally encoded its essentials, then synthesized the digital signal back into a reproduction of the original. 

   This method requires just one-third the bandwidth of current technology. 
If every mobile-phone subscriber switched to a digital phone, specialists say, a system could quadruple its number of subscribers. 

   Several other companies are developing their own systems. 
Sweden's Telefon AB L.M. Ericsson intends to demonstrate one in Los Angeles this month. 
Some industry executives believe the Swedish system could eventually allow systems to boost subscriber capacity by 10 to 20 times. 

   Motorola Corp., Northern Telecom Ltd., International Mobile Machines Corp. and others also are expected to demonstrate systems soon, according to Lynne Rose, director of the cellular trade group. 
The manufacturer whose technology is adopted by the industry standard-setting group probably will have an early advantage in selling equipment to system operators. 
A decision could be made as early as January. 

   Computer-Design Firm
   Upgrades Builders' Aid
   AN ATLANTA company, Integrated Computer Graphics Inc., has been helping contractors build houses by computer for five years. 
But just recently, the computer-aided design, engineering and manufacturing concern added software packages that let builders use materials in addition to wood and track inventory, purchase orders and receivables. 

   The software incorporates the knowledge of building professionals in a so-called rules-based expert system. 
Questioning a user about aims, needs and resources, the program responds with choices and decisions for the whole building process. 
It not only designs a house but specifies the quantity and type of materials to use, helping to eliminate waste. 
Richard P. Smyth, president, says this thorough planning can prevent any need for late design changes, saving perhaps 10% of a house's total cost. 

   Integrated also rewrote its software packages last summer in Unix, a computer operating system that can run on everything from mainframes to personal computers. 
Mr. Smyth says this will help Integrated reach a broader market. 
General Electric Co., for instance, is using the packages to design a plastic house in a project GE hopes will increase the use of plastic by the building industry. 

   Wristwatch Pager
   Nears Testing Time
   ONE OF Wall Street's favorite short sells last year was AT&amp;E Corp., a San Francisco start-up planning to sell Dick Tracy-type wristwatch pagers. 
After $35 million and 3 1/2 years, AT&amp;E may have a prototype as early as this month, says Charles Skibo, president. 

   The watch will be linked to a nationwide paging network through FM radio channels leased from existing stations in major markets across the country, Mr. Skibo says. 
The watch, besides telling time, will store up to four messages. 

   Analysts caution that AT&amp;E has been late delivering its prototype in the past. 
Alan Reiter, editor of two industry newsletters, says getting a sensitive receiver into such a small pager is difficult. 
Also, he says, federal rules bar AT&amp;E from building its own antennas to cover dead spots that FM signals don't reach. 
One paging specialist adds that AT&amp;E's wristband antenna and other factors may keep the watch from working more than 15 miles from a radio station, too short a distance for many users. 

   Mr. Skibo, who became president of AT&amp;E last summer after being ousted in 1987 from US Sprint Communications Co., thinks the watch will appeal to families and business executives who want to stay in close touch. 
The price of the watch should be competitive with those of conventional pagers: It probably will sell for about $200, with a monthly service charge collected by AT&amp;E of up to $15. 

   Pure Substances Offer
   Superconducting Clue
   RESEARCHERS at AT&amp;T's Bell Laboratories say they found an unexpected phenomenon while experimenting with superconductors. 

   Using extremely pure crystals of bismuth, strontium, calcium, copper and oxygen (one of the five superconductor families thus far discovered), the researchers found that electrical resistance increased gradually as more current was put through the material. 
In so-called dirty materials, with impurities and imperfections in their crystal formation, resistance suddenly rises when electrical current reaches a critical point, signaling that superconductivity has been precipitously lost. 

   Paul Fleury, a Bell Labs researcher, says the phenomenon may help scientists understand how impurities affect superconductivity. 
That knowledge, in turn, may enable scientists to lace superconductors with the right impurities to maximize current capacity at higher temperatures. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
