ID: 109	RANK: 36	SCORE: 6.793757
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880331-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Ursula Meese, and Others </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<G> JUS CNG </G>
<TEXT>
   Amid the stories about the two resigned Justice Department officials yesterday, the Washington Post had another story: "Independent Counsel Subpoenas Ursula Meese's Job Records." 
It now develops that Independent Counsel James McKay is investigating Mrs. Meese's $40,000-a-year job with the Multiple Sclerosis Society. 
"According to sources familiar with McKay's inquiry, the independent counsel has been trying to determine whether the Meeses' close friend, E. Bob Wallach, in effect helped supplement the Meeses' income by recommending Ursula Meese for the jobs." 
Mrs. Meese's job is matching MS patients with employers. 

   Whatever is going on here, the one thing we may fairly conclude is that it is worthy of investigation. But if it merits the attention of special prosecutors and reporters, then the town may hold enough such stories to command the attention of many such investigations. Last December, a UPI reporter produced a long story listing 73 relatives of House and Senate members who have worked for Congress in paid jobs since mid-1986. By law, members may not hire their own relatives, but the law says nothing about them working for other Members or for Congress itself. Here is a partial state-by-state summary, current at the time of UPI's story:
   American Samoa: Fiti Sunia, son of Delegate Fofo Sunia, works in the office of California Rep. Mervyn Dymally. 
"It's hard to get a position if you come in right off the street," says Fiti Sunia. 
Vaaomala Sunia, another of Fofo Sunia's sons, works as a Capitol Hill policeman. 

   Arizona: Vincent Fabrizio, stepson of Rep. Morris Udall is a staff member for the House Public Works Committee, chaired until last week by the late Rep. James Howard. 
Rep. Howard's daughter works on the Interior Committee chaired by Rep. Udall. 

   California: Edith Wilkie, wife of Rep. Don Edwards, works as executive director of the Arms Control and Foreign Policy Caucus. 
She worked for Congress before her husband's election. 

   Arlene Willis, wife of Rep. Jerry Lewis, works as his administrative assistant. 
While she worked for him before their marriage, their current relationship was not listed, as is required, on monthly payroll records. 

   Phyllis Coelho, wife of Rep. Tony Coelho, is a secretary in Indiana Rep. Andy Jacobs' office, where she worked before her marriage. 

   Douglas Boxer, son of Rep. Barbara Boxer of California, worked last summer for the House Ways and Means committee. 
His sister, Nicole, worked the previous summer for Rep. Les AuCoin. 

   Colorado: Janna Hefley, daughter of Rep. Joel Hefley, worked as a paid intern for Rep. James Bunning of Kentucky. 

   Connecticut: John Kennelly, son of Rep. Barbara Kennelly, worked last summer as a clerk for the House postmaster. 

   District of Columbia: John Ball, a brother-in-law of Delegate Walter Fauntroy, works in the House doorkeeper's office. 

   Florida: Daniel Barton, cousin of Rep. William Lehman, worked last summer as a page for the House doorkeeper. 

   Mary McGillicuddy, sister of Rep. Connie Mack, worked until last year for Rep. Barbara Vucanovich. 

   Hawaii: Andrew Matsunaga, brother of Sen. Spark Matsunaga, works as director of the Senator's Honolulu office. 
He began work before current anti-nepotism laws were passed. 
Also, Senator Matsunaga's son-in-law is a Capitol Hill police officer. 

   Idaho: Sallianne Stallings, daughter of Rep. Richard Stallings, worked as a summer clerk for the House postmaster. 

   Illinois: Doyle Evans, brother of Rep. Lane Evans, works in the House doorkeeper's office. 

   Herman Morris, nephew of Rep. Cardiss Collins, worked last summer as a clerk for the House doorkeeper. 

   Rose Marie Lipinski, wife of Rep. William Lipinski, works part time for the House Administration Committee. 

   Heather Davis, daughter of Rep. Jack Davis, worked as a paid intern last summer for Rep. Jim Bunning of Kentucky. 

   Phillip Miller, stepson of Rep. Charles Hayes, works for the House postmaster. 

   Kansas: Rhoda Glickman, wife of Rep. Dan Glickman, works as executive director of the Congressional Arts Caucus. 

   Kentucky: Kelly Hubbard, daughter of Rep. Carroll Hubbard, worked as a paid intern last summer for Rep. Les AuCoin. 

   Maryland: Samuel Lee Dyson, brother of Rep. Roy Dyson, works as a Capitol Hill policeman. 
He was hired before his brother's election, and reports that he has seen at least one congressional relative walk into a Member's office and "come out in a second with a job. . . . 
It is that easy when you know someone." 

   Massachusetts: Christopher Moakley, nephew of Rep. John Moakley, worked in six different temporary congressional jobs between 1982 and 1986, four of them patronage jobs controlled by his uncle. 

   Patricia Hamel, niece of Rep. Moakley, works as an office manager for Rep. Barney Frank. 
Susan Lewis, the niece of Rep. Frank, works for Rep. Stephen Solarz, although her relationship to Rep. Frank was not declared on payroll records. 
She had previously worked for Sen. John Kerry, whose staff also included John Dukakis, son of Governor Michael Dukakis. 
Susan Lewis's uncle, David Frank, was Rep. Solarz's press secretary until 1986. 

   George Early, brother of Rep. Joseph Early, runs the House folding room, which handles congressional mail. 
Folding-room employees have complained about being forced to lend money to supervisors and work 70-hour weeks without overtime pay. 
Mark Early, Rep. Early's son, works for Rep. Robert Traxler where he took the place of Dennis Early, the congressman's nephew. 

   Michigan: Barbara Shaffer, daughter of Rep. William Broomfield, works in the House clerk's office. 

   David Kildee, son of Rep. Dale Kildee, worked last summer for the House doorkeeper. 

   Minnesota: Peter Vento and John Vento, sons of Rep. Bruce Vento, both worked last summer as congressional clerks. 

   Missouri: Michelle Clay, daughter of Rep. William Clay, works as an assistant counsel for the House Judiciary Committee. 

   Montana: Griff Williams, son of Rep. Patrick Williams, worked for the House postmaster last summer. 

   Nevada: George Vucanovich, husband of Rep. Barbara Vucanovich, is a CPA who does financial consulting for three other GOP House members. 

   New Mexico: Clare Domenici, daughter of Senator Pete Domenici, works as a clerk for the House postmaster. 

   New York: Robert Power, stepson of Rep. Robert Garcia, also works for the House postmaster. 

   North Carolina: Stacye Hefner, daughter of Rep. W.S. Hefner, works for the House Administration Committee. 

   Anita Jones, daughter of Rep. Walter Jones, worked for the House Banking Committee until last year. 

   Joan Teague Rose, wife of Rep. Charles Rose, works as a staff assistant for a House agriculture subcommittee chaired by her husband. 
Mrs. Rose was hired shortly before her marriage. 

   Stephen Neal, son of Rep. Stephen Neal, worked for the House doorkeeper until last year. 

   North Dakota: Lucy Calautti, wife of Sen. Kent Conrad, works as an executive assistant for Rep. Byron Dorgan of North Dakota. 
Ms. Calautti is not listed in payroll records, as required, as the spouse of a Member. 
James Sinner, son of North Dakota Governor George Sinner, also works in Rep. Dorgan's office. 

   Ohio: Helen Rose Elias, a cousin of Rep. Mary Rose Oakar, works as a secretary for the House doorkeeper. 

   Bert Hammond, son-in-law of Rep. Louis Stokes, works for the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 

   Oklahoma: Wade Watkins, son of Rep. Wes Watkins, worked last summer for the House doorkeeper. 

   Oregon: Leland AuCoin, brother of Rep. Les AuCoin, works for the House clerk's office. 
The congressman's daughter, Stacey AuCoin, worked last year as a temporary employee for Rep. Robert Traxler. 

   Pennsylvania: Maureen Dinneen, daughter of Rep. Austin Murphy, works as an assistant for Rep. Nick Rahall of West Virginia, who serves with Rep. Murphy on two subcommittees. 

   Robert Dinneen, Maureen Dinneen's husband, works for a House committee on which Rep. Murphy, his father-in-law is a member. 
The committee also employed Tanya Rahall, Rep. Rahall's sister, for five years until 1984. 

   Kyle Jones Beatty, sister-in-law of Rep. Peter Kostmayer, works as a secretary for the House clerk. 

   Joel Secundy, nephew of Rep. William Gray, worked last summer for the House doorkeeper. 

   South Carolina: Thaddeus Strom, third cousin of Sen. Strom Thurmond, works as administrative assistant in Sen. Thurmond's office. 
"It's really coincidental that I'm working here," Mr. Strom told UPI. 

   Rita Hayes, sister of Rep. Butler Derrick, works as an administrative assistant for Rep. Elizabeth Patterson of South Carolina. 

   Texas: Katherine Brooks, daughter of Rep. Jack Brooks, worked last summer for the House doorkeeper. 

   Thomas Leath, son of Rep. Marvin Leath, worked last summer as a paid intern for Rep. Beryl Anthony of Arkansas. 

   Kimberly Coleman, daughter of Rep. Coleman, worked last summer for the House postmaster. 

   Utah: Scott Hatch, son of Senator Orrin Hatch, works for the Secretary of the Senate. 
The Senator's daughter, Wendy, recently worked for the House Administration Committee. 

   Ted Owens, son of Rep. Wayne Owens, worked for the House doorkeeper last summer. 

   West Virginia: Sandra Casper Wise, wife of Rep. Robert Wise, works for the House Ways Means committee. 
He worked for Congress prior to her marriage. 

   Wisconsin: Craig Obey, son of Rep. David Obey, works for the Senate Special Committee on Aging. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
