ID: 109	RANK: 52	SCORE: 6.346281
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871201-0114 </DOCNO>
<HL> You, Too, Can Rent
George Bush's Home
In Texas for a Night
---
Our Man Does So, and Pays
More Than Vice President;
Suite Fits a Hazy Identity
---
By Dennis Farney
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "To the George Bush residence, my good man!" 
I cry. 

   My cabdriver eyes me in his rear-view mirror. 
His reaction seems a little hostile, but I don't care: I am feeling positively vice presidential. 
I am about to become George Bush for a night. 
You can, too. 
Anybody can, for a price. 

   That is because Vice President Bush's private residence, for voter-registration purposes, is a hotel suite here. 
And when George and Barbara Bush aren't using it, the hotel rents it out to anybody who can foot the bill -- which in my case totaled $403 a night. 

   Residency in Suite 271 of the Houstonian Hotel makes Mr. Bush an officially certifiable Texan, buttressing his claim on a major electoral and fund-raising base. 
Yet the suite -- blandly impersonal, with hotel furniture and 101 of the Reader's Digest's condensed books -- is an apt symbol of a man with a hazy public identity. 

   Mr. Bush was born in Massachusetts and raised in Connecticut. 
He was educated at prep schools and Yale, then went into the Texas oil business. 
He was a Houston congressman from 1966 to 1970. 
His voting residence is here, yet his private home is in Maine. 
His campaign office says he and Mrs. Bush have lived in 28 residences in 17 cities. 
It adds up to an irresistible target. 

   "I'm glad to be here in Texas," fellow GOP presidential candidate Bob Dole said at a fund-raiser this fall. 
"I understand it's one of George Bush's home states." 

   Suite 271 -- with a big living room and a bar -- strikes me as neither preppy nor Texan. 
It is nondescript in a high-toned sort of way. 

   I check into 271 -- only hours after the departure of Mrs. Bush, the Houstonian staff tells me -- and take partial inventory. 
Two couches. 
Two easy chairs. 
Two bar stools. 
A dripping faucet. 
One television set, one stereo. 
All those Reader's Digest condensed books. 
It appears adequate: a quiet place, conducive to the thinking of vice presidential thoughts. 

   I think of dinner. 

   It seems appropriate, somehow, to invite two Texas liberal Democrats to dine "in the suite." (If I didn't invite them to the George Bush residence, who would?) 
One is Billie Carr, a veteran battler for women and minority groups who once showed up at a Texas state Democratic convention wearing shoes that, at the flip of a lever, converted into roller skates. 
The second is Rodney Ellis, a Houston councilman and former congressional aide. 

   They arrive, and jump to opposite conclusions. 

   "Old George is doing all right," says Mr. Ellis approvingly. 
He knocks on the wood paneling. 
"I could feel very comfortable here." 

   But Ms. Carr feels let down. 
"How can this be a 'residence' without a kitchen?" she demands. (We decide that Vice President and Mrs. Bush prefer room service to slaving over a hot stove.) 
"Why, this is just a hotel room. 
It's no different than any other hotel suite I've been in." 

   Over room-service veal piccata at the Bush table, Ms. Carr ponders what the suite says about George Bush as a person. 

   "This is so impersonal," she observes. 
"Not one personal item. . . . 
It's almost like he has to validate who he is by having an apartment here in Texas. 
It's kind of like he needs it to validate him, politically and personally. 
And maybe more personally than politically." 

   Jack Steel, an aide in the vice president's Houston office, politely declines to be drawn into such psychological interpretations when he joins me for breakfast at the hotel the next day. 
He says Mr. Bush simply stays here for the facilities -- including indoor and outdoor jogging tracks, two swimming pools and a health spa -- and the proximity to old friends. 
One is oil man C. Fred Chambers; C. Fred, a now-deceased Bush dog, was named after him. 

   The vice president, who has stayed here about 10 times in the past year, apparently hasn't used the suite to grapple with any grave crises of state. 
More typical, Mr. Steel indicates, was Mr. Bush's visit in March 1986. 
That was when he came to Houston to dedicate what may have been the largest banner ever made. 
It measured 150 by 100 feet and commemorated the Texas sesquicentennial. 

   The Houston connection clearly has been a boon to the Bush presidential drive. 
"We raised $750,000 for him in a single luncheon here," says Nancy Palm, an outspoken (her nickname is Napalm) Houston conservative who is part of the Bush Texas campaign. 
But keeping one foot in Houston -- and the other foot in Maine -- has also been a legal headache for the Bushes. 

   In early 1981, Mr. and Mrs. Bush sold their Houston house for some $843,000, reaping a capital gain of about $596,000. 
On their 1981 tax return, they asserted that they didn't owe any capital-gains tax on the Houston sale because they had rolled the gain into the purchase of their Kennebunkport, Maine, house, which they described as their principal residence for federal tax purposes. 

   The Internal Revenue Service disagreed. 
The Bushes' principal home, the IRS held, was the taxpayer-supplied vice presidential residence in Washington. 
Then the agency hit them for nearly $200,000 in back taxes and interest. 
Mr. Bush paid up, protesting that the agency had "socked it to me." 
But his troubles weren't over. 

   If Mr. Bush's principal private residence is in Maine, how can he vote in Texas? 
That is the legal question a Democratic state representative raised here in 1984. 
But the vice president, who has a personal car registered in Texas and still owns a vacant lot here, prevailed in a hearing. 
"To him, coming 'home' means coming back to Houston," says Harold DeMoss, a friend and his attorney on that occasion. 

   Coming home to the Houstonian costs the vice president $264 a night for the suite and two adjoining bedrooms. 
I wondered about that, since the Houstonian charged me $403 a night for the living room and one adjoining bedroom. 
"We have to get very creative with pricing in the hotel business," explains general manager Louis Lanzino. 
Because Mr. Bush brings staffers and Secret Service agents with him, he gets a discount. 

   Certainly my stay is worth every penny of my company's money. 
After breakfast, I head for the cushioned outdoor jogging track -- walking it (the way Barbara Bush does), not running (as George would do). 
Later, I work on my forehand and backhand on a balmy tennis court. 

   Pleasantly tired -- one is tempted to say bushed -- I repair to Suite 271 and my basket of complimentary fruit. 
The day before, while counting those Reader's Digest condensed books, I had come upon a title that, under the circumstances, seemed especially intriguing. 
It is called "Bush Baby." 
I open it now. 

   "Bush Baby," it turns out, isn't about George Bush or any member of his family. 
Bush Baby is a robot spy device that has parachuted into Yugoslavia. 
A British scientist is risking his life to get it out. 
I am hooked from the opening line: 

   "The last of the spring snow still lay in luminous patches. . . . 
" I reach for another grape and settle back in my vice presidential chair. 
This is going to be good. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
