ID: 109	RANK: 99	SCORE: 5.795020
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880503-0078 </DOCNO>
<HL> Many Hospitals Feel Financial Strain As More of Their Patients Need Public Aid </HL>
<AUTHOR> Bill Richards (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> GOVMT </CO>
<IN> PHA INS </IN>
<TEXT>
   A money crisis that shut one Chicago hospital last week and put a half dozen more on the critical list, underscores a growing national problem, hospital officials say. 

   As public aid patients increasingly concentrate in inner-city and rural hospitals, officials say many of those institutions are losing their ability to cope with financial stress. 
Last year's record number of 79 U.S. hospital failures, they say, was due in part to such financial pressures. 

   "If you have a disproportionate number of public aid patients and something happens to interrupt public aid payments, something has to give," says an official of the American Hospital Association, which represents about 5,800 U.S. public and private hospitals. 

   The increased concentration of public aid patients in a relative handful of hospitals is the result of both obvious and subtle pressures, experts say. 
"Part of it is simple geography -- when you have lots of poor people living around you, you're going to have lots of poor patients," says Gerard Anderson, director of Johns Hopkins University's Center for Hospital Finance and Management. 
But Mr. Anderson says there also is less obvious steering away of poor patients from some for-profit and large teaching hospitals. 

   Last week, when Illinois declared a temporary halt to Medicaid payments, Mary Thompson Hospital, a 203-bed inner-city institution immediately announced it was shutting its doors. 
Mary Thompson officials say that nearly 80% of the hospital's patients were on Medicaid or Medicare. 

   "Mary Thompson was so dependent on Medicaid that it was pushed over the edge when the money stopped," says James M. Broadway, vice president of the Illinois Hospital Association. 
Mr. Broadway says some 80% of Illinois' Medicaid patients are now concentrated in 20% of the state's 281 hospitals, mostly in low income areas in Chicago and East St. Louis. 
Medicaid is a state-administered medical program for the poor. 
Mr. Broadway predicts that in Illinois another half dozen inner-city hospitals could close before July, when the new fiscal year begins and the state is expected to resume Medicaid payments. 

   Illinois' hospitals may be the most severely pressed, but other states are feeling the pinch too. 
Last fall, when Michigan cut off Medicaid payments to its hospitals for 11 weeks during a spell of legislative wrangling, a number of Detroit inner-city hospitals came close to insolvency. 

   New Center Hospital, for example, with a 60% Medicaid patient load, had to close off one of its floors, lay off employees and order doctors to cut back admissions. 
"We don't have many wealthy or working-class patients, so we're very vulnerable," says Barbara Bates, New Center's controller. 

   Rural hospitals in poverty areas also are vulnerable. 
Of the 52 hospital closings in Texas in the past four years, 31 were in rural areas. 
Nearly each of those rural hospitals was the only hospital in town and most were heavily dependent on Medicaid and Medicare, the federal program supplying medical care mostly to the elderly. 
"That means," says Charles Bailey, vice president of the Texas Hospital Association, "that in 29 small Texas towns, people's access to health care services has been curtailed and compromised." 

   And when West Virginia ran out of money last fall and halted Medicaid payments for six months, one hospital closed and several others stopped admitting patients. 
West Virginia hospital officials say a number of rural hospitals were teetering on the brink of closing when the state resumed Medicaid payments last month. 

   Hospital management experts say a more widespread problem is the failure of state and federal programs to keep public aid payments in line with rising hospital costs. 
"That's happening in 15 to 20 states," says Johns Hopkins' Mr. Anderson. 
"The hospitals either end up providing less services, or go broke." 

   In Texas, for example, Medicare covers only about 78% of patient care while some rural hospitals may have as many as three-quarters of their patients in the federal program. 
The state's Medicaid payments are so skimpy that only about a quarter of those under the poverty line are covered, Texas hospital officials say. 

   In Illinois, the collapse of the Medicaid program is being blamed on political ineptitude rather than a drought of funds. 
Dean Schott, a spokesman for the Illinois Department of Public Aid, which administers the state's Medicaid program, says state legislators deliberately underfunded the program to avoid raising state taxes. 
Besides hospitals, Medicaid payments have also run out for some 750 nursing homes and for thousands of dentists, home health care agencies and pharmacists. 

   Whatever the reason for the cutoff, some inner-city hospitals are predicting they will face "doomsday" because of their heavy dependence on Medicaid. 
"We've already started telling our suppliers they'll have to wait to get paid," says Denise R. Williams, president and chief executive officer of Roseland Hospital in Chicago. 
Ms. Williams says the South Side hospital is the only one available in a five-mile radius and about half the patients rely on public aid. 

   The next step, Ms. Williams says, is to start turning away patients. 
After that, the hospital will close. 
"The reality," Ms. Williams says, "we can't make it to July without that money." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
