ID: 191	RANK: 7	SCORE: 20.785395
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880609-0158 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Agency Studies Shifting AIDS Tests On Chimps Abroad </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AFRIC FREST GOVMT </CO>
<IN> PHA </IN>
<G> CNG </G>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON (AP)  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Frustrated by a ban on importing chimpanzees, U.S. officials are looking into shifting AIDS tests on the animals to Africa and the Soviet Union, a move specialists call a needless death blow to the last chimps in the wild. 

   "This is very, very bad," said Jane Goodall, a leading chimpanzee specialist who was recently in Washington to alert legislators to the unannounced program. 
"It is not a choice of AIDS or chimps. 
Enough can be bred in captivity." 

   Sen. John Melcher (D., Mont.), a veterinarian, has threatened to block such a move. 

   The director of the National Institutes of Health, James Wyngaarden, confirmed in an interview that the government agency is considering acquired immune deficiency syndrome research projects in Africa and the Soviet Union, because U.S. law bans importation of chimpanzees. 

   "We clearly don't want to get into an international fracas over seeming to subvert rules that apply in this country," Mr. Wyngaarden said. 
But he added, "We're taking lots of looks at Africa." 

   He provided no specifics. 
But confidential minutes obtained by the Associated Press show that the National Institutes of Health decided quietly in March to identify target groups of African chimpanzees and explore means of using them in research. 

   According to the minutes, an NIH committee decided to develop "an African chimp field survey to provide us with the numbers of animals, serological (blood) information and (their) condition." 

   Possible sites for research include a laboratory in Liberia operated by the New York Blood Center and the Sukhumi center in Soviet Georgia, which would have to import chimps, as specialists say it now has none. 

   Chimps, which were instrumental in developing a hepatitis B vaccine, are valuable research subjects, because their genetic material varies less than 1% from that of humans. 
In current research, scientists are injecting chimps with experimental vaccines for AIDS. 

   Mr. Wyngaarden said NIH scientists want more chimpanzees than are available, but are thwarted by the U.S. Endangered Species Act and the 14-year-old Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, a treaty that prohibits trade in animals threatened with extinction. 

   Experts fear that, once in Africa, researchers would have access to chimpanzees smuggled illegally across borders from endangered colonies, sometimes with false documentation. 

   Ms. Goodall, the chimpanzee specialist, said new roundups of chimpanzees, during which hunters often kill adults to get at the young, "would not only have a devastating effect on chimpanzees but would bring them to extinction." 

   An average of 10 mothers and babies are killed for every infant chimp successfully exported, she said in a telephone interview from England. 

   Ms. Goodall and eight eminent U.S. and European biomedical specialists wrote to Nature magazine, saying that although chimpanzees were essential to AIDS research, enough could be bred for laboratory purposes. 

   "Going to Africa is no solution," Marc Girard of the Pasteur Institute in Paris said. 
"We must breed more, better use those we have, and find alternatives." 

   Geza Teleki, an American primatologist who heads a Washington-based international specialist group, the Committee for Conservation and Care of Chimpanzees, said too little has been done to breed captive chimps, and contended, "The bottom line is competition for the few chimpanzees still hanging on in Africa, and to hell with all the national and international laws protecting them." 

   A 1978 chimpanzee census commissioned by NIH showed chimp populations gone from or depleted across much of their traditional African range. 
The unpublished census was made public recently by specialists. 

   Most chimpanzees in medical research originated in West Africa, where their number has dropped this century from a million to about 17,000, one specialist said. 
Outside of West Africa, only Zairean and South African authorities control large groups of chimps. 
"The NIH clearly intends to continue being an accomplice in driving the species to extinction beyond the view of the American public," the specialist asserted. 

   Sen. Melcher said he opposes such a transfer of U.S. chimpanzee research to Africa. 
"NIH is going to have to abide by international agreement," he said, warning that Congress could block any move "offshore" by inserting restrictions in NIH appropriations. 

   The number of chimpanzees already used in U.S. research is in dispute. 

   Mr. Wyngaarden said only 400 to 600 chimps are available, and the infant mortality is 30% in breeding centers used by NIH. 

   But Jan Moor-Jankowski, director of Lemsip, a large primate-research facility in New York, challenged these figures, saying that NIH has access to 800 animals and that more than 100 are born each year, a number that could be increased. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
