ID: 252	RANK: 21	SCORE: 6.787363
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881024-0086 </DOCNO>
<HL> Corporate Focus: Chrysler Ends Strike, Yielding Little --- Firm Lost Mini-Van Output But Won on 'Outsourcing' Issue </HL>
<AUTHOR> Bradley A. Stertz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR C </CO>
<IN> AUT </IN>
<DATELINE> FENTON, Mo.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Chrysler Corp. resolved the vexing two-week strike at its highly profitable mini-van plant in this St. Louis suburb without giving much ground to the union. 

   It's the first time in a year of various clashes with the United Auto Workers union that Chrysler hasn't had to blink to get a settlement. 
But as the plant's 3,200 workers return to the job today Chrysler won't be chalking up a victory, for the strike will leave unpleasant legacies. 

   It will slash fourth-quarter profit by some $56 million, or an estimated 16%, at the only Big Three auto maker whose earnings have been declining all year. 
Chrysler can't make up the lost production of at least 12,600 stretched-version mini-vans, because the factory already was working full tilt. 
Many would-be buyers may defect to Ford Motor Co., which is launching its stretched mini-van this month. 

   Perhaps more importantly, the strike starkly illustrates how unexpected conflict can be sparked not by any one event, but by the simmering frustrations of workers and companies alike. 
The St. Louis strike, company and UAW officials agree, hadn't any single cause. 
Instead, worker fatigue and resentment clashed with the company's determination not to give ground to workers yet again. 

   "This was a case of ghost issues taking control of the circumstances," said Jerry Tucker, director of the United Auto Workers' eight-state Region 5, which is based in St. Louis. 
"You had workers who've been on a punishing work schedule loaded with overtime at a plant that's building Chrysler's hottest selling item. 
That created a lot of pent-up raw emotions and gave the workers some leverage to vent those emotions with a strike." 

   The main "ghost issue" was outsourcing -- a cost-saving strategy in which auto makers shift work from their own factories to cheaper outside suppliers. 
The St. Louis workers walked out on Oct. 5, the day their local contract expired. 
They said they wanted to ban moves such as the one Chrysler made two years ago, when it outsourced the plant's seat-cushion manufacturing, at a cost of 125 jobs. 

   "If we don't stop outsourcing now it will become like dominoes through our plant and other plants," said Michael Fletcher, a 15-year veteran at the plant, while walking the picket line last week. 
Earlier this year, feelings on the issue ran so high that a group of workers at Chrysler's complex here (which also includes an auto plant) smashed the windows out of a Dodge Colt on their parking lot. 
Even though the car wore a Chrysler badge, it was built by a Japanese manufacturer rather than by American labor, and thus was the ultimate form of outsourcing. 

   But the St. Louis plant hasn't even contemplated any additional outsourcing, say company and union officials. 
What's more, outsourcing is an issue reserved for the UAW's national contract with auto makers, and thus isn't allowed as an issue in local bargaining. 
"I tried to make it clear to the local members that outsourcing is addressed in the national contract with Chrysler," Mr. Tucker said. 

   But emotion, not logic, ruled. 
Four times last summer, the plant's workers had wildcat walkouts because of the stifling heat inside the factory. 
And bitter memories linger from the three years when the plant, and its workers, sat idle after a financially struggling Chrysler closed it in 1980. 

   "You know we're used to standing on the wrong side of this fence," shouted worker Greg Pottoroff after polishing off a beer and watching the World Series on a chilly night at the picket line. 
"It wouldn't bother us if they closed the plant tomorrow and moved everything to Mexico. 
They pushed us out on the streets before. 
I made it through then, and I can do again." 

   What made the situation even more volatile was last month's heated battle for the job of UAW Region 5 director won by Mr. Tucker. 
He campaigned as a dissident on a platform that accused the union of getting too close to the auto makers. 
The mini-van plant voted against Mr. Tucker, and Mr. Tucker says he didn't encourage the strike. 
Nonetheless, his message apparently won notice among the rank-and-file. 

   Meanwhile, Chrysler wasn't about to lose another battle this year to the union. 
Already, the No. 3 auto maker backed down when the UAW staged strong opposition to Chrysler's efforts to sell its Acustar Inc. parts subsidiary. 
And angry worker reaction to the closing of Chrysler's assembly plant in Kenosha, Wis., forced the company into a number of concessions, including creating a trust fund for displaced workers there. 

   "There was no way we could cave in on outsourcing, which had already been hammered out in our national talks," one Chrysler executive, who asked to remain unnamed, complained last week. 
"If we did, this kind of thing would never end." 
So even though the strike had become more costly than the six-day strike at all of Chrysler's Canadian facilities last year, the company held firm. 

   The auto maker grew so desperate to end the walkout -- and so pessimistic about its chances of doing so -- that it sent letters to each worker, via overnight mail, to persuade them to return to work. 
"This strike is adversely affecting you," argued the letter, signed by general plant manager J.B. Burkhart. 
"All employees have much to be thankful for. 
We are all well-paid, our fringe benefits are excellent, and it is a good place to work." 

   But several workers said they burned their copies in the oil drum keeping them warm on the picket line. 

   The company also took the local union to court, saying the strike was illegal and violated its national contract with the UAW. 
But U.S. District Court Judge Clyde S. Cahill, after hearing testimony, admonished the workers and the company to resolve their differences themselves. 

   Finally, last Friday, the intransigence on both sides gave way. 
Chrysler made a new proposal that included a few minor concessions, such as being more flexible in granting time off on hot days, and increasing the number of excused absences allowed the workers in each department to six a day from three. 

   With that, the union, after having rejected two previous offers from Chrysler, voted overwhelmingly to return to work. 
"The members just began to realize this was a stand-off that wasn't going anywhere," Mr. Tucker explained. 

   ---

                      Chrysler Sales Mix
            1987 Truck and car sales, in percent*
                            Sales
    TRUCK -- Dodge Caravan, Dodge
    Mini Ram Van, Plymouth Voyager      20.4%
    CAR -- Dodge Aries/
    Plymouth Reliant                    10.3%
    Other Car Sales                     41.0%
    Other Truck Sales                   28.3%
    Total:                 1,597,130 vehicles
          Passenger Minivan Sales -- U.S. Market
    Foreign minivans                     4.3%
    Chevrolet Astro                     17.0%
    Ford Aerostar                       23.1%
    Dodge Caravan                       55.6%
    *Through September

</TEXT>
</DOC>
