ID: 252	RANK: 48	SCORE: 6.421254
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870629-0044 </DOCNO>
<HL> Chrysler Executives Both Plead Innocent
In Odometer Case; 2 Related Suits Filed
---
By John Bussey
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> C
AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Two Chrysler Corp. executives charged with conspiracy to commit odometer fraud Friday pleaded innocent in U.S. District Court in St. Louis. 

   Meanwhile, at least two class-action suits -- one in St. Louis and another in Illinois -- have been filed against the No. 3 auto maker in what has become for Chrysler an increasingly embarrassing legal and public relations mire surrounding the odometer case. 

   The suits stem from a Justice Department investigation that last week resulted in a 16-count indictment charging that a Chrysler unit sold as new more than 60,000 cars and trucks, which company employees allegedly had driven with the odometers disconnected. 

   In one of the consumer class-action suits, an owner claims a Chrysler car was delivered with chipped paint and a burn in the upholstery. 
The Justice Department has said some of the cars were damaged more severely, but nonetheless repaired and sold as new. 

   Highland Park, Mich.-based Chrysler has said it didn't do anything wrong and that the vehicles were part of a quality test program. 
Yesterday, Baron Bates, a company spokesman, said Chrysler is still trying to determine whether it can identify all of the owners whose cars were part of the program, which has been in operation for years. 
"Record keeping, like everything else, is imperfect," he said. 

   Lawyers for Frank J. O'Reilly and Allen F. Scudder, former supervisors of Chrysler's assembly operations who each were charged with one misdemeanor count of conspiracy to commit odometer fraud, also say their clients did nothing wrong and have been unfairly singled out by the Justice Department. 

   Mr. O'Reilly currently is a senior executive in Chrysler's Canadian operations. 
Mr. Scudder retired from Chrysler, but was brought back last year on a special assignment to oversee a plant conversion in Kenosha, Wis. 
A tentative trial date was set for Aug. 31. 

   "There are any number of individuals who have been aware of the type of program" at Chrysler, said Mr. O'Reilly's counsel, Barry Short, a former U.S. Attorney now with the law firm of Lewis &amp; Rice in St. Louis. 
"If a mistake was made, it wasn't criminal." 

   Frederick H. Mayer, another St. Louis lawyer representing Mr. Scudder, said he believes the Justice Department focused on his client and Mr. O'Reilly because of a memo concerning problems with the test program that both men had signed. 
"It appears these fellows are being made scapegoats," he said. 
Chrysler is paying for the two executives' legal expenses. 

   The company hasn't yet made a formal pleading concerning the government's charges against its unit, Chrysler Motors Corp. 
The unit has been accused of conspiracy to commit mail fraud, wire fraud and odometer fraud and faces a maximum fine of $120 million. 
In addition to the class-action suits filed in St. Louis and Illinois, Mr. Bates said the company has received reports, but hasn't been able to confirm, that a third suit was filed in California. 

   "These class-action suits have no more merit than the charges by the Justice Department," Mr. Bates said. 
"It's not these few opportunists that concern us; it's all of the Chrysler owners who may be confused by the publicity. 
It's them that we have to reassure." 

   Mr. Bates added that the company has talked to some owners of cars damaged during the quality-test program. 

   Hugh Jones, a 61-year-old retired electrician, and his wife, Shirley, own the car involved in the St. Louis class action. 
In an interview, Mr. Jones said his wife "fell in love" with the gold 1986 Gran Fury while shopping for a new car and that the couple, who live in Hazelwood, Mo., bought it for between $12,000 and $13,000. 

   But later, the Joneses received a letter from the U.S. attorney's office informing them that their car was part of the Justice Department's investigation. 
Mr. Jones claims that, besides chipped paint and a burn in the upholstery, the car had scratches and the floor mats were uprooted when they bought it. 
Since then, he said, he has returned the car repeatedly for a variety of engine and transmission problems. 

   "You go out and pay that much money and find out you bought a used car," he said. 
"Somebody's got to teach these big corporations that they can't do this to the consumer." 
Mr. Jones wouldn't say what damages the suit seeks. 

   Details of the second suit, filed in Illinois weren't immediately known. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
