ID: 252	RANK: 59	SCORE: 6.315522
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861231-0099 </DOCNO>
<HL> A Riverboat Gamble,
Aided by Tax Break,
Sails Into Criticism
---
Special Rules Helped Work
On St. Louis Party Ship;
But It Still Could Founder
---
By Lee Berton
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/31/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TAXES GOVMT
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> ST. LOUIS  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Tonight, more than 400 local business and civic leaders and their spouses will board the S.S. Admiral docked here on the Mississippi for the fanciest floating New Year's Eve party in town. 

   In a lavish art-deco ballroom, they will dance to "In the Mood" and munch on Cajun-style chicken and poached salmon at a black-tie soiree thrown by William E. Maritz, a wealthy local businessman. 

   "This is my tribute to a great boat parked under the Gateway Arch," the 58-year-old Mr. Maritz says. 
Some 250 workmen have just finished a multimillion-dollar refurbishing of the five-deck ship. 
They have converted it to a 160,000-square-foot entertainment center containing fancy restaurants and boutiques and flanked by two dockside theaters. 

   "As youngsters, we used to smooch with our girlfriends on the top deck," Mr. Maritz recalls. 
"The Admiral is a nostalgic trip to the past." 

   The party also will celebrate a present-day business coup scored by 50 of the celebrators, including Mr. Maritz, with big assists from the new tax law, the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the city of St. Louis. 
By banding together in a tax-shelter partnership and making the Admiral shipshape by year-end, the limited partners can reduce their 1986 federal taxes by about $50,000 each -- with the tax reductions totaling some $2.5 million. 

   Some legislators outside Missouri are less than thrilled. 
"It's a disgrace for American taxpayers to have to pay more taxes because some wealthy St. Louis businessmen want a lavish playboat," Sen. Howard Metzenbaum says. 
The Ohio Democrat has been scrutinizing transitional tax benefits ladled out by Congress. 

   The boat -- originally called the Albatross -- is one of more than 400 businesses benefiting from special tax exemptions during the transition to the new law. 
Retroactive to last Jan. 1, the law eliminates the 10% investment tax credit, except for special business projects. 
Most of the exemptions affect businesses that either are troubled or will benefit the local economy. 

   But because of the rush to push through the tax bill, the list of exemptions wasn't distributed to Congress before it was passed. 
"As a result, some egregious exemptions were sneaked through this year, and the Admiral is the worst of them," Sen. Metzenbaum contends. 
"If St. Louis businessmen want a fancy boat, let them pay for it themselves." 
However, he concedes that with the law enacted, "there isn't much I can do about it." 
He adds: "It's proof positive that good government programs so often go awry when some folks have good friends in Congress." 

   The Missouri congressmen who gave the Admiral a bipartisan push by sponsoring the exemption were Republican Sen. John C. Danforth and Democratic Rep. Richard A. Gephardt, whose district includes parts of St. Louis. 
"Transition exemptions are created to encourage capital investment and jobs, and the Admiral does just that," asserts Ronald Pearlman, a St. Louis tax attorney who helped set up the Admiral partnership and got the congressmen's staffs behind the project. 
The Admiral expects to hire up to 400 full-time and part-time employees, he says. 

   A Gephardt aide says refurbishing the Admiral has just as much merit as helping a troubled steel mill. 
And Sen. Danforth's press secretary calls the Admiral "economically important for downtown redevelopment of St. Louis, which has gone through hard times during the current economic turndown in the Midwest." 

   Sen. Metzenbaum also is upset that in 1983 St. Louis got a $5 million, 15-year, low-cost HUD loan, which it re-lent to the Admiral partnership. 
"We have poor people living in slums and cuts in Medicare, so why should federal money go for this boondoggle boat?" he asks. 

   Retorts a HUD official: "When the Admiral repays St. Louis, the city is required to put the money plus the low-cost interest into housing and community development. 
A loan for a boat may seem unusual, but we lent $4 million to New York City to help set up the aircraft carrier Intrepid as a tourist attraction parked on the Hudson River." 

   The project to restore the Admiral has been marked by delays, huge cost overruns and unexpected problems. 

   The vessel -- 378 feet long and 95 feet abeam -- was built in 1907 as a railroad ferry. 
In 1940, two river captains, Joseph and John Streckfus, installed a silver-painted sheet-metal superstructure and converted the Admiral to an excursion vessel that reminded some St. Louisans of the Confederate ironclad Merrimack. 
In 1979, the Coast Guard decided that the Admiral needed a new hull. 
But the Streckfus brothers couldn't afford the $1.5 million bill. 
So they sold the Admiral for $600,000 to a Pittsburgh businessman. 

   Two years later, Mr. Maritz and a few friends, upset at losing a local landmark, bought the Admiral, minus its diesel engines, for $1.6 million. 
"We surely overpaid, but we were driven by civic pride and felt this had to be done for St. Louis," Mr. Maritz says. 
"Little did we know what lay ahead." 

   The group members expected to spend only a few million dollars. 
But after peeling away the sheet metal, they discovered that spiffing up the ship would cost about $25 million. 
To raise money, the limited partnership was formed. 
Chicago-based Bally Corp., which runs an amusement park here, agreed to be the general partner. 

   Each limited partner, including Mr. Maritz, forked over $160,000, with Bally's Six Flags unit contributing $1.7 million. 
HUD weighed in with its $5 million, and local banks lent $10 million at fairly low interest rates. 

   But the Pittsburgh man had towed the boat to Paducah, Ky., and the new owner -- S.S. Admiral Partners -- couldn't get it home quickly. 
"High Mississippi waters kept us from sailing under bridges, so we were delayed for several months," recalls William P. Haviluk Jr., the general partner's manager for the project. 

   A local contractor promised to finish sprucing up the Admiral by late 1985, but the superstructure needed more steel than anticipated, and such jobs as laying a dance floor turned into slippery propositions. 
"Putting a ballroom floor in a boat is like working with a potato chip," Mr. Haviluk says. 
"The floor curves all over the place." 

   Earlier this year, the contractor, after getting an extra $1 million from the city, was fired by the partnership. 
"We felt he was over his head, and so were we," Mr. Haviluk says. 

   A new contractor resumed work last June, but high water caused further delays. 
Workmen had to be barged to the site. 
"We'll be touching up fixtures with a paint bucket in hand right up to the last moment," Mr. Haviluk says. 

   Messrs. 
Maritz and Haviluk concede that the success of the Admiral is questionable. 
"We'll have to gross about $15 million the first year, and that could be tough," Mr. Haviluk says. 

   When Mr. Maritz isn't fussing over the Admiral, he runs Maritz Inc., a family business. 
"My company specializes in marketing studies, but I have to admit it's impossible to read the future on this project," he concedes. 
"The Admiral will either be the greatest thing since sliced bread or the world's biggest white elephant. 
Only time will tell." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
