ID: 252	RANK: 7	SCORE: 8.662949
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870915-0101 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<IN> REGIONS -- </IN>
<TEXT>
Plan for a County's Survival:
First, Eliminate Some Towns
---
By Eugene Carlson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
09/15/87
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)
   IMAGINE A LOCAL ELECTION where you are given the choice of dissolving your hometown. 
Wiping it clean off the map. 
A lot of voters in St. Louis County, Mo., may face that decision next spring as part of an unusual experiment in government reorganization. 

   The audacious plan is being championed by St. Louis County Executive Gene McNary. 
For starters, he suggests completely redrawing the boundaries within St. Louis County, creating 21 municipalities where 90 exist now. 
Mr. McNary says streamlining the county's crazy-quilt geography, along with rejiggering the tax system, would bring efficiency to local government and improve the area's business climate. 

   It would also put a stop to a phenomenon that is making life miserable for Mr. McNary and a lot of other officials of counties in fast-growing metropolitan areas of the U.S. 
This is the push by communities to gobble up valuable, tax-producing land through annexation or outright incorporation. 

   WHEN A CITY or a town reaches beyond its boundaries and snaps up a shopping center or an affluent housing development on county land, it improves its own tax base. 
The county, meanwhile, loses a chunk of real estate that was generating revenue for its own treasury. 

   The trend is strictly one-way. 
Mr. McNary and other metropolitan county executives seem powerless to stem the land grabs. 
They foresee a situation not many years hence when communities will have skimmed off all the valuable real estate, leaving counties in possession of a handful of isolated, unattractive parcels. 

   What to do? 
Mr. McNary's plan at first glance looks like surrender. 
He proposes incorporating all of St. Louis County, wrapping every last chunk of county land into one or another community's boundaries. 
The county budget would be cut in half; it would turn over police and fire duties to the communities and worry only about regional matters, such as roads and economic development. 

   St. Louis County, 524 square miles and one million population, nestles between the Missouri and Mississippi rivers and the western limits of the city of St. Louis. 
It is largely developed, with a mix of wealthy and low-income neighborhoods, factories and parkland. 
About 40% of the county's land is inside some municipality's boundaries. 
The rest of the area, most of it on the county's periphery at the farthest distance from downtown St. Louis, is unincorporated. 

   IT'S THE PROLIFERATION of cities and towns in the county that grates Mr. McNary's sense of government efficiency. 
The 90 municipalities range from a robust community of over 50,000 population to glorified neighborhoods with fewer than 100 residents. 
That's the second-highest number of cities and towns of any county in the U.S., the county says; only Allegheny County, Pa., which includes Pittsburgh and environs, has more. 

   Mr. McNary totes up the numbers. 
"There are 530 elected officials, 43 fire departments and 70 police departments. 
There's something like 700 different taxing rates. 
It's ludicrous for people to be paying for that kind of inefficiency." 

   Continued piecemeal zoning and incorporation will leave the county in dire straits, the executive says. 
"We'll have 130 or 150 municipalities, and any time a company wants to come in, there'll be a neighborhood zoning board to make them dance through the hoops. 
That's not conducive to economic vitality. 

   Mr. McNary and his planning staff have produced a blueprint that radically alters this patchwork pattern. 
It shows 21 communities, nearly all with populations in the 25,000 to 75,000 range. 
That's large enough to provide a broad range of city services but not so big that citizens can't be heard. 

   The new cities would absorb smaller units and get some county land on the side. 
For example, the revamped city of Normandy would digest all or part of 26 municipalities. 

   THE VOTING PROCEDURE is complex. 
A signature-gathering campaign has assured county reorganization a place on the ballot. 
The actual plan will be drafted by a 15-member Board of Freeholders, a peculiar institution created by Missouri's constitution to arbitrate conflict between the city and county of St. Louis. 
It could be Mr. McNary's blueprint, or one substantially different. 

   Oddly, the freeholder procedure for county reorganization also requires approval by city of St. Louis voters. 
Mr. McNary says city officials have pledged not to sabotage reorganization, despite a nasty disagreement over the location of a new professional football stadium that is taking on the character of a blood feud. 

   Selling reorganization, particularly to county residents and elected officials of towns destined to disappear, won't be easy. 
"The strategy is to preserve the large municipalities and give them some of the unincorporated land they've been trying to annex anyway," says Mr. McNary. 
And the small communities? 
"They're proud of their independence, but with the loss of (federal) revenue sharing, they're about to go under anyway." 

   The county executive is reconciled to howls of pain. 
"The very small municipalities will get 50% of the ink and make 50% of the noise on radio and television," he says. 
But their numbers at the ballot box aren't large. 
The 25 smallest communities make up only 1% of the county electorate. 
"We hope they'll be reasonable about finding a solution," Mr. McNary says, without much conviction. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
