ID: 252	RANK: 76	SCORE: 6.211407
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871016-0131 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Sports: Cards Kill Giants
---
By Frederick C. 
</HL>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> St. Louis  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   This has been the year of the frisk in baseball, so it was a wonder no one asked St. Louis manager Whitey Herzog to roll up his sleeves or uncover other parts of his anatomy to prove he concealed no mirrors, magic wands or other prestidigitorial paraphernalia here Wednesday night. 

   Playing his Cards with less than a full deck because of injuries, he had just watched them defeat the San Francisco Giants, 6-0, to win the National League pennant in seven games after trailing three games to two. 
It was his (and their) third pennant in six years, but the swami admitted to some perplexity over the victory process. 

   "I thought {John} Tudor would pitch pretty good Tuesday night because he'd been pitching well and the Giants hadn't seen him this year," said Herzog of the left-hander's seven scoreless innings in a 10 win. 
"I thought Danny {Cox} would do good tonight, 'cause he always pitches well in big games. 
What I didn't know was how we'd score." 

   How they scored in the decisive seventh game was mainly on a three-run, second-inning home run by Jose Oquendo, a part-timer and lifetime .248 hitter who had struck only two such blows in a four-season Major League career. 
Oquendo stood at the plate with runners on second and third and pitcher Cox due to bat next, and the big press-conference question later for Giants' manager Roger Craig was whether he'd considered walking OQ intentionally. 
He said no. 
After Craig departed, one news type turned to another and asked, "Can you imagine a pennant hinging on not walking Jose Oquendo?" 

   So another improbable victory enters the annals of sport, and we can look ahead to what promises to be an equally improbable World Series starting Saturday night in Minneapolis. 
That prospect looms ominously because it will be the first one contested partly indoors. 
The Minnesota Twins, new champions of the American League, play their home games in the Metrodome, a facility known mostly for its trampoline turf and temporarily vanishing fly balls. 
Indoor baseball can be regarded as either progress or decadence. 
I lean toward the latter view, although, in fairness, I also think that if baseball must be played in Minneapolis in late-middle October, it might as well be indoors. 

   The Twins won their pennant the old-fashioned way, scoring 34 runs in beating up the Detroit Tigers in five games ended Monday afternoon in Detroit. 
They feature a broad-shouldered lineup that wouldn't look out of place in the National Football League -- the real one, that is. 
In Kent Hrbek, Gary Gaetti, Kirby Puckett and Tom Brunansky, they have four genuine home-run threats, which is four more than the Cards have with Jack Clark on the bench for the past month with a bad ankle. 
How will the Cards pitch to those gents? 
"Carefully," said Mike Roarke, the St. Louis pitching coach. 

   It has become fashionable in recent years to depict the World Series as a clash between the cultures of the competing cities, but that won't fly this year because St. Louis and Minneapolis-St. Paul are more similar than different. 
Both are nice, Midwestern towns filled with nice, middle-class people who treat baseball games as an occasion for disorder. 

   The Twins fans have come to rowdyism late. 
They're so innately sedate that when they sing "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" at the Metrodome, they still "root, root, root for the home team" instead of subbing in the name of their Twinsies. 
With playing-field prosperity, however, has come the discovery that 55,000 people screaming or blowing whistles together in an enclosure can puncture eardrums, and they aimed for high casualty counts in the playoffs. 

   St. Louis folks like to come to the ballpark wearing Redbird red, clap their hands to hurdy-gurdy organ music, and cheer when Cardinal owner Gussie Busch drives his beer wagon around the field before games. 
Their darker side was brought out in the late playoffs by Jeffrey Leonard, the Giant outfielder with the sweetest follow-through since Gardner Dickenson and the showiest home run trot since Jimmy Piersall. 

   Leonard raised Card fans' ire by hitting four home runs in the first four games of the series and casting various aspersions on them and their favorites. 
It was his outfield mate, Chili Davis, not Leonard, who called St. Louis a "cow town," but it was Leonard at whom a cowbell was thrown Tuesday night, along with cups, coins and other objects. 
And when Leonard pursued a fly ball near the wall he got a beer shower for his pains. 
Not to worry, "it was light beer," said Leonard, who usually isn't that funny. 

   Despite the taunts, Leonard got three hits in the final two games at St. Louis and won the series' most valuable player award, but all were singles. 
So, too, were the Giants' other 11 hits in the final set, which is why they were shut out successively by Tudor ( with relief help) and Cox, and will spend the rest of October at leisure. 
They had gained a 3-2 edge mostly by out-homering the Cards, 9 to 1, and snuffing the vaunted St. Louis running game with some well-timed pitchouts by manager Craig. 

   The series turned in game six, won by the Cards, 1-0. 
The only run came in the second inning, when Giant right-fielder Candy Maldonado lost Tony Pena's fly ball in the lights and wound up on his rear as Pena rumbled to third. 
Pena later scored when Maldonado couldn't throw him out at home after catching a short fly ball. 
Having base runners in seven innings, and getting a fine pitching performance from Dave Dravecky, availed the Giants not. 

   With Clark and his 35 home runs on the sidelines, St. Louis has what used to be called a "banjo-hitting" lineup. 
A ukulele would be more like it. 
Of their 56 hits against the Giants, 46 were singles. 
Moreover, big right-hander Cox had pitched only two complete games and no shutouts in 32 starts this season before Wednesday. 

   Cox is used to rising to the occasion, having starred in the team's 1985 World Series loss to Kansas City, but Oquendo was unaccustomed to the spotlight. 
His epic shot came on a fast ball up and over the plate. 
He said he knew he hit it well, but thought home run only "when the people let go of balloons, and I saw them rising over the stadium." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
