ID: 178	RANK: 26	SCORE: 5.871478
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880629-0026 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   GORBACHEV PROPOSED major constitutional changes for the Soviet Union. 

   In a speech opening the first Communist Party conference in 47 years, the Kremlin leader offered changes that would strip the party of its administrative powers and transfer them to an elected presidential system of government that would replace the Supreme Soviet. 
Gorbachev's plan goes well beyond what he has said before by outlining for the first time how he intends to carry out his pledge to divide party and state. 
Gorbachev proposed that the party, which he would continue to head, would set the direction of policy. 

   Police in Moscow arrested groups of demonstrators demanding ethnic rights and calling for a multiparty political system in the Soviet Union. 

   ---
   THE U.S. FILED a lawsuit aimed at ousting the leadership of the Teamsters. 

   The civil suit, filed in U.S. court in New York, charged that the union's 18-member board deprived its 1.6 million members of their rights by allowing the union to be dominated by organized crime. 
The suit asked the court to remove from office any Teamsters official later found to have violated federal racketeering laws and appoint a trustee to ensure "free and fair" union elections. 
The suit is the first to apply the RICO statute's civil provision to an entire international union. 
A union official called the suit an "anti-labor tactic." 

   Teamsters President Presser, who has cancer, was hospitalized in Cleveland in serious condition. 
Presser is a defendant in the government's suit. 

   ---
   A car bomb exploded in a suburb of Athens, killing the U.S. military attache in Greece. 
There wasn't any immediate claim of responsibility for the blast, but senior police officials said they suspected the leftwing November 17 urban terrorist group. 

   ---
   The Reagan administration recalled its ambassador to Mexico for consultations in the wake of Mexico City's decision to release a jailed Puerto Rican nationalist wanted by the U.S. for terrorist activities. 
William Morales was freed from prison Friday and allowed to flee to Cuba. 

   ---
   NASA postponed the launch of the space shuttle Discovery until Sept. 4 because preparation of the redesigned spacecraft is taking longer than expected. 
The flight, which would be the first since the January 1986 explosion of the shuttle Challenger, had tentatively been scheduled for August. 

   A National Research Council panel urged NASA to rearrange its priorities to make scientific investigation in space at least as important as manned exploration of space. 

   ---
   A former CIA official pleaded innocent in federal court in Washington to charges that he conspired illegally to arm Nicaragua's Contra rebels. 
Joseph Fernandez, the agency's former station chief in Costa Rica, asserted through his lawyer that he was only following Reagan's policies. 

   ---
   Nicaragua's Contra rebels told President Ortega that they would extend a cease-fire indefinitely but didn't see any reason for further negotiations on the subject. 
Sandinista-Contra peace talks collapsed this month without an armistice agreement. 

   ---
   At least 50,000 Hungarians marched past the Romanian Embassy in Budapest to protest a plan by Bucharest to demolish thousands of Romanian villages and build "agroindustrial complexes." 
Monday's rally was believed to have been the largest unofficial demonstration in Hungary since an anti-Soviet uprising was crushed in 1956. 

   ---
   Rescue workers in Paris found more bodies in the wreckage of two commuter trains, raising to at least 59 the number killed in Monday's head-on crash at the Gare de Lyon. 
Officials of the state-run railroad blamed the crash on faulty brakes. 

   ---
   The Senate Commerce panel cleared legislation that would make the FAA independent of the Transportation Department. 
The measure's aim is to make the FAA more efficient in responding to air-safety issues. 

   ---
   The White House reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to Israel but told Defense Minister Rabin that violence shouldn't be used to quell Palestinian unrest. 
In East Jerusalem, Arabs staged a strike to mark the 21st anniversary of its annexation to Israel. 
About 160,000 Arabs in the Gaza Strip were ordered confined to their homes. 

   ---
   Pope John Paul II installed 24 cardinals and used the Vatican ceremony to urge followers of traditionalist Archbishop Lefebvre to refrain from breaking with the church. 
Lefebvre plans to consecrate four bishops tomorrow without papal permission. 
In Vienna, Austrian police said an alleged plot to assassinate the pontiff was a hoax. 

   ---
   An AMA committee recommended that the medical association adopt new proposals for battling AIDS, including a call for AIDS testing of all prison inmates and for tracing the sexual partners of those with the disease. 
Many doctors expressed opposition to the testing plan, which will be voted upon tomorrow by AMA delegates in Chicago. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
