ID: 178	RANK: 57	SCORE: 5.145665
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880929-0019 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   THE KREMLIN SCHEDULED a meeting to reorganize the Communist Party. 

   Foreign Minister Shevardnadze cut short his visit to the U.N. as Soviet officials abroad were summoned to Moscow for tomorrow's special plenary session of the 300-member Central Committee. 
The meeting had been planned, but a date hadn't been set. 
The party officials are expected to overhaul the country's political structure and make leadership changes. 
In Moscow, Gorbachev reaffirmed his determination to proceed with his program of political, social and economic restructuring, and sources dismissed speculation of an emergency. 

   Afghan rebels fired rockets into Kabul, killing at least 35 people. 
And U.S.-Soviet discord over Afghanistan intensified, threatening Moscow's withdrawal. 

   ---
   NASA CLEARED the space shuttle Discovery for today's scheduled liftoff. 

   Space agency officials at Cape Canaveral in Florida gave the go-ahead after resolving questions about a possible problem with the spacecraft's satellite payload. 
The data-relay satellite is to be placed in orbit about six hours after launch. 
Air Force weather forecasters said the outlook was favorable. 
Final approval for the launch of Discovery and its five-man crew must come from a 21-member team 10 minutes before liftoff. 

   Discovery's mission would end a 32-month hiatus in the U.S. space program caused by the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in January 1986. 

   ---
   China's foreign minister will travel to Moscow later this year for the first Sino-Soviet working visit since an ideological split in the 1960s. 
The trip signals a major warming of Chinese-Soviet ties and is expected to lead eventually to a summit between leaders of the two nations. 
A return visit by Shevardnadze to China also was planned. 

   ---
   Congress approved legislation authorizing as much as $299.5 billion in defense spending in the fiscal year beginning Saturday. 
The bill was stripped of curbs on the Strategic Defense Initiative and nuclear weapons tests that led to a Reagan veto last month. 

   ---
   Dukakis pledged that as president he would bar former top members of his administration from lobbying the government while he was in office. 
While the Democratic candidate criticized the ethics of the Reagan White House, Bush argued that Dukakis's college loan plan would "put the IRS on your tail for the rest of your life." 

   ---
   Washington and Madrid concluded an agreement allowing the U.S. to use military bases in Spain for eight more years. 
Under the pact, reached at a meeting in New York between Shultz and his Spanish counterpart, the U.S. won't provide military or economic aid in return for use of the installations. 

   ---
   Burma's main opposition group accused the military government of killing nearly 1,000 people since a coup Sept. 18. 
The pro-democracy group registered as a political party but said it still hadn't decided whether to participate in promised elections. 
Two other parties have been formed to challenge 26 years of authoritarian rule in Rangoon. 

   ---
   South Africa and Cuba extended U.S.-mediated talks in Brazzaville, Congo, aimed at ending Angola's civil war. 
A timetable for the pullout of 50,000 Cuban troops was unresolved. 
The issue is considered crucial to ending the war and gaining Namibia's independence. 
In Zaire, President Mobuto was trying to arrange regional peace talks. 

   ---
   Thatcher said Britain is more determined than ever to eliminate terrorism in Northern Ireland. 
During a rare and heavily guarded visit to Ulster, the British prime minister was met in Lisburn by Protestant demonstrators opposed to a 1985 accord giving the mostly Roman Catholic Irish Republic a role in Ulster's administrative affairs. 

   ---
   Israel's foreign minister dismissed the view of some Egyptian and U.S. officials that the PLO is evolving toward acceptance of the Jewish state. 
After a meeting in New York with Shultz, Peres said the PLO had "run away from the need to make a choice." 

   ---
   Lebanon's Christian army chief said his troops will prevent partition of the country, and rival Moslem and Christian cabinets appeared to be moving to avoid a confrontation. 
Meanwhile, a car bomb exploded at a Syrian checkpoint near Beirut, killing five and injuring 21, including five Syrians. 

   ---
   Czechoslovakia expelled two British military attaches for activities "incompatible with their diplomatic status," the official Czech news agency said. 
Last week, Britain accused three Czechoslovaks of spying and gave them two weeks to leave London. 

   ---
   Flood waters in northern India started to recede, and New Delhi said at least 282 people had died in a week of torrential rains. 
Hundreds of residents remained marooned in Punjab state, where 1,500 villages were under water. 
At least 70,000 people in the area were evacuated, some by helicopter. 

   ---
   Yugoslav police seized 41 ethnic Albanians suspected of trying to sever ties between Belgrade and the southern Kosovo province. 
Tensions between Kosovo's 1.7 million ethnic Albanian majority and its 200,000 mainly Serb minority have been high since Kosovo Albanians rioted in 1981. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
