ID: 178	RANK: 83	SCORE: 4.957309
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870624-0004 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News --
World-Wide</HL>
<DD> 06/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   SOUTH KOREA'S CHUN HELD talks with opposition leader Kim Young Sam. 

   In an effort to quell two weeks of anti-government protests, the South Korean president met with Kim at the presidential Blue House in Seoul. 
Kim, who said the government today would lift the house arrest against dissident Kim Dae Jung, was expected to demand the repeal of Chun's decision halting debate on electoral changes, and the release of those arrested in the protests. 
Despite the meeting, about 20,000 students called for a march Friday on the Blue House. 

   Assistant Secretary of State Sigur arrived in Seoul and was to meet with both Kims and Chun to press for a settlement of the South Korean political crisis. 

   ---
   AN EX-CIA AGENT AIDED North in concealing the use of funds tied to Secord. 

   Glenn Robinette, currently a security consultant, told the congressional panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair that he and North exchanged backdated letters to indicate North was paying for a home-security system. 
Robinette said the $16,000 bill was paid by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord. 
Meanwhile, the panels remain undecided over the conditions for North's questioning. 

   A former Pentagon aide said he resigned as a trustee of a fund for Secord's legal expenses after he was unable to learn who had contributed $500,000. 

   ---
   Shultz and Shevardnadze are making arrangements to meet in Washington to clear obstacles to a treaty calling for the elimination of medium-range missiles from Europe, arms-control adviser Rowny said. 
Officials said the talks probably would be held July 10-11, but the State Department said a meeting hadn't been officially scheduled. 

   ---
   Washington has agreed to allow West Germany to try in its own courts a suspect in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner rather than extradite him to the U.S., government sources in Bonn said. 
Attorney General Meese received assurances that the suspect, Mohammed Ali Hamadi, would face charges of air piracy and murder. 

   ---
   Peru's prime minister resigned, paving the way for what an adviser to President Garcia said would be a cut in the country's already-diminished payments to foreign creditors. 
Luis Alva Castro, who is also finance minister, apparently quit to begin an effort to succeed Garcia. 
The cabinet also offered its resignation. 

   ---
   The Supreme Court upheld as constitutional a 1984 law passed by Congress requiring states to raise their drinking age to 21 or lose their federal highway aid. 
The court said Congress's authority over spending permits the legislative branch to impose conditions on federal funds. 

   ---
   Norway intends to enact changes in its export-control system to cover transfer of technical knowledge and services. 
Japan, in support of a U.S. effort, also announced plans to consider tightening controls on the export of strategic goods to the Soviet bloc. 

   ---
   Iraq said its forces attacked and sank a "very large naval target" heading for an Iranian port in the Persian Gulf. 
It was Baghdad's second raid on shipping in four days. 
Separately, Saudi Arabia has agreed to search for Iranian mines off the Kuwaiti coast, and has designated hospitals for U.S. troops in case of emergencies. 

   Reagan met at the White House with GOP congressional leaders, who expressed concern over a U.S. plan to protect Kuwaiti ships in the gulf. 
Sen. Dole of Kansas said "a lot of legitimate questions" about U.S. policy in the region remain unresolved. 

   ---
   The Marine Corps said a former guard at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow has been charged with lying and perjury in connection with statements that led to espionage charges against other Marines. 
The charges against Cpl. Robert Williams appeared to further cloud the sex-spy case. 

   ---
   The AMA issued recommendations on AIDS testing, including mandatory tests for prison inmates and immigrants, and routine but voluntary testing for patients at venereal-disease and drug-abuse clinics. 
The medical group also urged the Reagan administration to create a commission to study the disease. 

   ---
   Jewish activists arrived in Rome and vowed to stage protest demonstrations in St. Peter's Square during Austrian President Waldheim's meeting tomorrow with Pope John Paul II. 
The Vatican again defended the meeting, saying it would be "morally wrong" to postpone the audience. 

   ---
   President Habre said Reagan had pledged to help Chad economically and militarily. 
Habre, on a visit to Washington, also said N'Djamena was willing to share with both the U.S. and France some $500 million of Soviet military equipment abandoned by Libyan forces as they were routed from northern Chad earlier this year. 

   ---
   A NASA review panel expressed concern that the space agency isn't planning sufficiently for alternative approaches in case problems develop with design changes to the space shuttle booster rockets. 
The independent committee said attention isn't being paid to "critical aspects of the design." 

   ---
   U.S.-backed Afghan rebels downed a Soviet-built transport plane in Afghanistan last week, killing all 43 aboard in the second such incident in a fortnight, Western diplomats said. 
The report coincided with continued fighting in southern Afghanistan. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
