ID: 153	RANK: 39	SCORE: 5.673562
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861216-0078 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Life Styles of the Rich and Famous:
Christmas Books: A Holiday Sampler
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 12/16/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The rich are richer than you or me. 
They aren't afraid of looking ostentatious either. 
As unabashed as Marie Antoinette, they let the readers of Town and Country eat lavish slices of their opulent lives in Palm Beach. 
This year, you could read about the very newly arrived and preposterously luxurious life of the designer Carolyne Roehm in the New York Times, New York Magazine and other centers of modern morality without ever coming across the phrase nouveau riche. 
So let's not be stuffy this Yule. 
Let's push our noses against the aquarium glass and watch the big resplendent fish of this and other days glide through their gilded halls, unblushing, acquisitive, "sportif," fur-lined and fun. 
You don't even have to leave your own undistinguished, unphotographable living room to do it. 
Just buy one of these books, or, better yet, give them to friends you want to put politely in their place. 

   ---
   Even if they have a yacht, its unlikely theirs will be as nice as the boats in Jill Bobrow and Dana Jinkins's "The World's Most Extraordinary Yachts" (Norton, 221 pages, $50). 
My favorite is "Nabila," a "self-sufficient island" that belongs to the Saudi businessman Adnan Khashoggi. 
At 281 feet in length, it isn't quite as big as Queen Elizabeth's Britannia (412 feet), but it has a few features Her Majesty might envy, including a small screening room with 1,500 films and cashmere blankets to snuggle under. 
Mr. Khashoggi can choose from among 280 telephones to conduct business while afloat, and if he should tire of haggling about, say, the price of missile launchers on the international market, he can slope off to the blue suede and gold lame pillows of Nabila's discotheque. 
Not just for show, however, the ship has a crew of 50, its own operating room, and earned a bit of its keep as a set for the James Bond film "Never Say Never Again." 

   ---
   For the landlubbers in your set, the odds-on favorite is "The Majestic World of Arabian Horses" (Abrams, 213 pages, $60) by William L. Pereira Jr., photographs by Martin H. Schreiber. 
Though it comes from a publisher known for art books, this is not just a collection of pretty pictures of graceful descendants of the Godolphin Arabian (1724-1753), pictured here in a posthumous painting done by George Stubbs in 1792. 
The most romantic of all horse breeds is beautiful, but it also has a history. 
After mythic beginnings in Araby, the tale moves to Europe and in particular to Poland, yes Poland, where Czar Alexander I established a stud in 1817 at Janow Podlaski. 
Polish Arabians snorted futile defiance at the advancing Nazi hordes in 1939, as Polish cavalry mounts. 
The stud survived the war much depleted, but it has rebounded and now supplies stock to capitalist fanciers at one of the world's great horseflesh auctions, well attended by rich Americans and conducted in English. 
Hard cash only, no zlotys accepted. 

   ---
   Rich people also like to spend time inside at the table. 
And they can afford to have other people polish their silver collections. 
At least one cannot imagine that the Baron and Baroness Thyssen-Bornemisza have the time to look after all the extraordinary pieces that are scattered about the rooms of their Villa Favorita in Lugano, Switzerland, or at Daylesford House in Gloucestershire, England. 
Normally, these intricately sculptural cups and tankards and plates are not shown to the visiting public. 
And most of us will not see them on exhibit next fall in the U.S.S.R. 
So "European Silver: The Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection" (Vendome, 311 pages, $95) by Hannelore Mueller is the place to look if you want to see how a table setting really ought to be. 
Perhaps the greatest of the Thyssen treasures is a rococo traveling service of 53 gilded silver items made in Augsburg around 1750. 
More humble in its fabulous way is a 17th-century "tortoise flask," also from Augsburg. 
A flat silver bottle is the tortoise's body; its shell is the natural shell of a Greek tortoise. 
The learned author remarks accurately on the "alert appearance of the animal with its watchful eyes." 

   ---
   Splendid as this and the rest of the Thyssen holdings are, no collection formed as recently as theirs with a mere German heavy industrial fortune can match the treasures contained in the Topkapi Saray Museum in Istanbul. 
There, in the former palace enclosure of the Ottoman Empire, the ruling sultans amassed everything from rugs to scimitars for six centuries. 
The first two of a projected five volumes have now appeared: "The Topkapi Saray Museum: Costume, Embroideries and other Textiles" and "Manuscripts" (New York Graphic Society, 216 and 280 pages, $150 each volume), translated, expanded and edited by J.M. Rogers of the British Museum from original Turkish texts by various hands. 

   Sumptuous as objects themselves, these books will introduce most Americans to an unsuspected universe of high accomplishment and delicacy. 
In the textile volume, the embroidered court kaftans in a dozen styles have been photographed flat and unoccupied, making excellent color abstractions on the page. 
The Topkapi library has been legendary in Europe since the Renaissance. 
Its illustrated manuscripts come not only from the Near East but from China, and other cultures exotic even in Istanbul. 
The richness of the classical Ottoman manuscript pictures rivals those from India and Medieval Europe. 
They are realistic to the point where the painting of Selim II receiving a bowing ambassador in 1567 (painted in 1581) can bring the now uninhabited rooms of the Topkapi to life for the modern visitor. 

   Future volumes will explore jewelry and metalwork, carpets (Persian and Turkish) and architecture (the harem and other palace buildings). 
But given the price of these books, it might be cheaper to go to the Topkapi itself and wander among the exhibitions, stopping at the parapets to look over the Golden Horn and pretend to be a sultan in the full exercise of unimaginable power. 

   ---
   Not as grand as the Ottomans, but perhaps luckier in the long run, Henriette and Peter Clifford of Frampton Court, Gloucestershire, discovered 300 Victorian flower paintings in their attic in 1982. 
Evidently dismissed as routine amateur work by the Clifford sisters and aunts who made them, they were in fact gorgeous, rare and botanically interesting folk art. 
Collected as "The Frampton Flora" (Prentice Hall, 192 pages, $25) by the British nature writer Richard Mabey, the paintings survey plants in the immediate vicinity of the Clifford house, the Vale of Berkeley, from winsome, leaning yellow common fleabane to a wild raspberry in all stages of development at once, from white flower to heavy hanging red fruit, and with roots exposed. 
The Mabey text is an expert commentary on the science and offers easygoing social and family history as well. 

   The Cliffords epitomize the virtues of the mid-19th-century English countryside. 
They were anything but flashy. 
Their paintings were stitched up in scrapbooks and stowed in the attic almost as soon as they were made, according to Mr. Mabey, who is judging from the remarkable brightness of the colors of the originals. 
The reproductions seem to be more subdued, but they are still most charming, and it is easy to see how this facsimile edition turned into a best seller in England. 

   ---
   For a pure draught of a completely different, hyperurban, very smart life style, try "The Complete Lyrics of Lorenz Hart" (Knopf, 317 pages, $40,), edited by Dorothy Hart and Robert Kimball. 
Mr. Hart was the poet laureate of the Broadway musical in the greatest era of Broadway theater, which reached its commercial zenith in 1926. 
His words and Richard Rodgers's music expressed the spirit of the top drawer in Manhattan, the college-educated cleverness that could take pleasure in the internal rhyming of "Caring too much is such/A juvenile fancy" or the joyfully mixed metaphor of "If my heart gets in your hair, You mustn't kick it around." 

   Hart's sister-in-law and Mr. Kimball, the musical-theater historian who previously devoted himself to Cole Porter, have dredged up all the Hart lyrics that industry could locate. 
They believe many songs are still missing. 
Perhaps this is not a full-blown tragedy, since many in this book are less than galvanic, especially without music to go with them. 
Song lyrics go best with songs, but this is still a bracing gust of the cleaner air of a pristine Manhattan, down whose streets Fred Astaire danced without fear in a spotless tuxedo. 
The nostalgic will also be happy to have the pictures of the Hart shows, including one of Gene Kelly surrounded by showgirls in the original "Pal Joey" of 1940 or another of Dennis King, Vera Zorina, Vivienne Segal and Walter Slezak in "I Married an Angel" (1938). 

   Hart understood all about the surface of wealth, what it could do and what it wasn't. 
In the most glittering language, he serenaded the simple life. 
In the heart of the Depression, he produced "The Lady is a Tramp" (1937). 
"Social circles spin too fast for me," he wrote, "My Hobohemia is the place to be." 
It is the real American note, slick but not phoney: "I go to opera and stay wide awake" or "I go to Coney -- the beach is divine." 
He knew about "life style" before they invented the word. 
But in the end, with all the style a person could hope for, he put the emphasis on the life half: "No dough -- Heigh ho!" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
