ID: 153	RANK: 57	SCORE: 5.419956
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880128-0047 </DOCNO>
<HL> Mohammed's Heir: His Moslem Followers Dote on the Aga Khan And His Philanthropy --- But He's No Stern Ayatollah; He Enjoys Horses, Yachts And Fiat's Gianni Agnelli --- The Imam From Chantilly </HL>
<AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> FREST </CO>
<DATELINE> KARIMABAD, Pakistan  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The science class at the Aga Khan Academy for Girls has been rehearsing for weeks short speeches explaining the parts of a big plastic eyeball, the process of generating hydrogen in a test tube, and the difference between weight and mass. 

   But when their smiling 51-year-old visitor bounces into the classroom, most of the girls burst into tears, their speeches forgotten. 
He keeps smiling. 
They go on crying. 

   The emotion is understandable. 
To them this man is part pope, part John D. Rockefeller -- and a beacon to a better life. 

   Karim Aga Khan, 49th Imam of the Shia Imami Ismaili Moslems, for whom both the school and the town are named, has come to visit his flock. 
One of the world's richest men, the Aga Khan, who claims descent from the prophet Mohammed through the prophet's son-in-law, is the spiritual leader of about 15 million Moslems, some of whom live here in one of the poorest places on earth. 

   To the Ismailis, scattered through 25 countries from South Asia to the Middle East to East Africa to Western Canada, the Aga Khan is a dispenser of homilies and philanthropy. 
To his circle of friends, the Aga Khan is also a socialite, the owner of a chateau near Chantilly, a house in Paris and one on Sardinia's Costa Smeralda. 
He has more than 500 thoroughbred racehorses, is part owner of luxury hotels in Sardinia and Venice, is an accomplished skier and yachtsman, and is an intimate of Gianni Agnelli, the chairman of Fiat S.p.A. 

   From Aiglemont, the Aga Khan's estate near Chantilly, he directs the 150 people who administer $130 million a year in grants, who design schools to be built by villagers and who give awards for the best in Islamic architecture. 

   To world leaders, the Aga Khan is a figure worthy of receiving lines and state dinners. 
Queen Elizabeth II bestowed on him the title "His Highness," which is what Queen Victoria called his grandfather. (Most of the Aga Khan's employees call him HH.) 

   To other Moslems, the Aga Khan is either a heretic or an inspired bridge between tradition and modernity, a man quite unlike the Ayatollah Khomeini, the Shia leader best known in the West. 

   The sum of these various parts was born an Indian prince in Geneva to an English mother and half-Italian father; he grew up in Kenya and is a British subject. 
He speaks Italian, French and English and urges his followers, some of whom speak Urdu or Swahili, to learn English as a second language. 
English and science, he says, are the "global intellectual currencies." 

   One balmy night in Islamabad, President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq gives him a warm handshake and a hug at the airport, hops with him into the back seat of a brown Rolls-Royce and deposits him in Pakistan's State Guest House. 
"He is a five-in-one," says President Zia: "a good family man, a businessman, a sportsman, a religious thinker and a developer of the Third World." 

   It is the latter two roles that brought the Aga Khan to Pakistan for this two-week visit. 
He formally opens the Karimabad girls' school, one of more than 300 schools run by the Aga Khan Education Services. 
He inspects assorted irrigation canals and dirt roads sponsored by the Aga Khan Rural Support Program. 
He and President Zia open a new hotel in Faisalabad run by the Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development. 
He talks with officials of the Aga Khan Health Services about some of the 200 hospitals and clinics they run. 
He addresses dozens of hillside gatherings of Ismaili faithful. 

   He collects gifts along the way. 
The colonel of the Chitral Scouts army regiment gives him a plumed hat. 
The villagers of Khaiber give him a gigantic head of cabbage. 
The villagers of Brep give him a yak. 
The villagers of Broschal give him four yaks, one of which has a red banner stretched between its horns that says "Welcome." 

   Followers in wealthier Ismaili communities give their leader a voluntary cash contribution not unlike a Mormon tithe. 
This money, says the Aga Khan, goes into community development projects. 
So, too, he says, did the money collected by his grandfather, Sir Sultan Mahomed Shah Aga Khan, a colorful eminent Victorian who had himself weighed against gold, diamonds and platinum to celebrate his jubilees. 

   The history of the Ismailis is as colorful as Sir Sultan. 
The sect broke from the rest of the Shias in the eighth century, when they decided to follow the descendants of a man called Ismail as the legitimate heir to the Imamate instead of the descendants of his brother (whom the rest of the Shias accepted). 
Because they believe in a living, hereditary Imam, Ismailis are shunned by other Shias. 

   From their original base in Persia, Ismailis began to wander across North Africa, and, among their accomplishments, they founded Cairo. 
The first Aga Khan (the title means Great Leader) fled Persia after a dispute with the Shah, and in 1841 wound up in British India. 

   The family remained in India, loyal to the British. 
The first Aga Khan died in 1881; his son and heir died four years later. 
Sir Sultan became Imam at the age of eight and remained so for 72 years. 
He was married four times. 
He dined with Queen Victoria in 1898 and took tea with Queen Elizabeth in 1953. 
He presided over the League of Nations in 1937 and pressed the British for a Moslem state in what is now Pakistan. 
He founded schools and hospitals in India and East Africa. 

   His son, Prince Ali Khan, who was once Pakistan's ambassador to the United Nations, is best remembered for his marriage to Rita Hayworth. 
When Sir Sultan died in 1957, he skipped over his playboy son to give the Imamate to his 20-year-old Harvard-educated grandson. 

   "The world has changed," says the present Aga Khan, who is still married to his first wife, an Englishwoman born in India by whom he has two sons and a daughter. 
He has politely but firmly ruled out any gold-and-diamond weighing ceremonies, and he stays out of politics. 

   At Harvard the future Aga Khan majored in Islamic studies. 
He played soccer, rowed and nurtured a persistent passion for skiing. 
He skied for Iran in the 1964 Winter Olympics at Innsbruck. 
And for several years he would move his office to St. Moritz for the winter so he could ski in the mornings and work in the afternoons. 

   His taste for yachting led him and a group of investors to buy in 1962 an undeveloped chunk of Northeast Sardinia, on which they have built four luxury hotels, golf and tennis clubs, and a yacht basin. 
The development is said to be worth $1 billion. 
The Aga Khan's new motor yacht, based in Sardinia, is named Shergar after his most famous racehorse, which was kidnapped in 1983 and never found. 

   As is true with many shy men, the Aga Khan has a sense of humor that tends to be self-effacing. 
He once told a story about trying to reach a friend through a U.S. hotel switchboard operator. 

   "Just tell him the Aga Khan called," he said. 

   "The who? 
The who?" the operator replied. 

   "The Aga Khan." 

   "The who? 
The who?" 

   "At least she didn't say, 'The what? 
The what?'" 

   He has no identity problems among the world's Moslems, though most of the other Shias think that the true Imam is in hiding, to appear only on Judgment Day. 

   "God bless the prophet and his progeny," murmur the villagers sitting cross-legged on dusty carpets, surrounded by the breathtaking peaks of the Karakoram mountains. 
"God bless the prophet and his progeny," they repeat, as the Aga Khan descends from the sky by Pakistani army helicopter to attend the village meeting of Sust. 

   A tiny, ancient woman in red and orange is pushed before the Imam, who is seated on a makeshift, rug-covered throne. 
"The new irrigation tunnel has allowed us to plant 6,000 willow trees and 600 apple trees and to earn money for the education of our children," she says, tears welling in her eyes. 
She is unable to continue. 

   Abdul Aziz, the village's president, his chest festooned with medals, finishes the story. 
The 60 households in the village have managed to save 93,500 rupees from the sale of fruit. 
By borrowing against that, they have bought fertilizer and a tractor. 

   "Look at this, look at this," says the Aga Khan, tugging a companion's elbow to show off Sust's irrigation tunnel, a 1,360-foot-long cavity blasted from the mountainside. 
The villagers (using dynamite purchased with His Highness's money) channeled melting mountain snow -- the only water available in this high desert -- to previously arid land. 
"Our engineers told them they couldn't do it," he says, "and, as usual, the villagers were right and we were wrong." 

   He sidesteps a drainage ditch. 
"A year ago there was nothing, nothing," he says, obviously excited. 
"Now look at those willow trees. 
They burn the wood for fuel. 
We calculated the cost of getting a gallon of fuel oil up here from Karachi. 
Astronomical. 
Now they can grow their own. 
They sell their fruit, save the money, and borrow against it to plant more trees. 
Remarkable, remarkable." 

   Here in the Northern Areas, per-capita income is just $150 a year. 
Aga Khan projects help any villages willing to elect their own leaders, make the decisions and do the work themselves. 
They needn't be believers. 

   The Aga Khan's helicopter has dropped him in Broschal, a village of 1,050 people who believe the true Imam is still in hiding. 
Their leader, the mir of Nagyr, looks like Ayatollah Khomeini, whom they revere. 

   The villagers initially didn't want to deal with the heretic Ismailis. 
But the mir, an accomplished politician, talked them into it. 
Now they are grateful for an Aga Khan-financed irrigation channel, which saved their thirsty cattle and allowed them to buy a shiny Massey-Ferguson tractor. 
They give him the four yaks. 
He sits on their tractor. 

   "How much do you pay a tractor driver?" he asks an astonished villager. 

   "A hundred and forty rupees {$8} a week," the man replies. 

   "Can I negotiate?" retorts the Aga Khan. 

   From Broschal, it is a quick helicopter jump to Karimabad. 
The Aga Khan Academy for Girls, designed by the Aga Khan's staff architect, is a one-story, concrete block structure. 
As he moves from classroom to classroom of awed girls, the Aga Khan seems pleased. 
When the girls regain the power of speech, they tell him they want to be teachers, doctors, nurses and lawyers. 
He tells them to master the forces of change, "which, like these powerful and unpredictable mountains, are full of surprises." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
