ID: 153	RANK: 65	SCORE: 5.313006
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870223-0114 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

---
By Martha Bayles</HL>
<DD> 02/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Stroll into the high-glitz atrium of Manhattan's Trump Tower, and what do you see? 
I mean, what is there to look at besides the crowds; the ground-floor forest; the miles of gleaming brass; the six storys of peach-colored Italian marble cascading with water; the acres of immaculate windows displaying emerald-cut diamonds, Louis XV furniture, life-size horses inlaid with Chinese ivory, Swiss champagne truffles and onyx-handled letter openers? 

   Yes, and there's always yourself. 
In the glass, in the brass, in the polished marble, even in the water, Trump Tower swims with reflections. 
Woe to you if you're not ultra-spiffed and ultra-coiffed; you'll regret it at every turn. 
And conversely, whatever pleasure you take in your own appearance will multiply as you see it mixing and blending with such lavish surroundings. 

   Judith Krantz works the same way. 
Her best-selling novels overwhelm us with glittering details of wealth and power; yet they also reassure us with reflected images of ordinariness. 
Take Maxi Amberville, the heroine of "I'll Take Manhattan," the latest bit of Krantz pulp to be transformed into celluloid by Judith's husband, Steve. (The miniseries airs Sunday, March 1-Wednesday, March 4, 9-11 p.m. EST, on CBS.) 

   Maxi (Valerie Bertinelli) is the daughter of Zachary Amberville (Barry Bostwick), a mighty magazine mogul who has just died in a freak accident. 
An envious, unscrupulous and womanizing uncle named Cutter (Perry King) wants to dismember and sell his late brother's empire, so Maxi rushes home from Europe to fight the good fight. 
Naturally, the poor dear needs a place to sleep, so she buys a $6 million apartment in the stratospheric reaches of (you guessed it) Trump Tower. 

   Fear not, ordinary mortal. 
You will be provided with glimpses of somebody's swanky penthouse, probably in Toronto, where most of the interiors were shot. 
But don't think too hard about these images of opulence being acquired in Canada because even the Krantzes must stick to a budget, and you'll float right up there, without feeling cheated that those 68 floors do not really rise above 56th Street and Fifth Avenue. 
You'll feel right at home with Maxi as she thrashes around on the Savonnerie carpet shrieking with indignation at the fact that women's magazines present images of beauty and luxury out of the reach of ordinary mortals. 

   At first glance it seems ironic that a character from Krantzland should fulminate against the marketing of images that are "too perfect." 
"These magazines are not selling dreams," wails Maxi, "they're selling put-downs . . . heartache . . . dissatisfaction . . . envy . . . 
Why can't they sell a magazine that likes women just the way they are?" 
Needless to say, this outrage would be more convincing if Krantzland ever contained any contented or fulfilled females who did not also happen to be pulverizingly beautiful. (The one ordinary-looking woman in "I'll Take Manhattan" is unloved, abused, crippled, betrayed, and eventually permitted to jump off a tall building of far less architectural distinction than Trump Tower.) 

   Yet Ms. Krantz is a sly one. 
Her characters may be gorgeous and filthy rich, but when they're shown achieving success or making their way in the world, it's obvious that they're just folks. 
Zachary, the good guy, is without social pretension, and so is Cutter, the bad guy. 
Maxi's mother, Lily (Francesca Annis), is a bit snooty on account of being an English aristocrat, but her children don't inherit the trait. 

   Maxi in particular is so down to earth that when we see her squealing with delight in the Trump Tower atrium, we could be in any shopping mall anywhere in America. 
Nor does Maxi intimidate us with special skills, talent or education. 
After spending one summer sharpening pencils for her father's art director, and the rest of her life gambling, marrying, and hot-air ballooning, Maxi is able to revamp one of her father's smaller magazines into a new, "woman-liking" format. 
She does this by thrashing and shrieking, and by manipulating her handsome ex-husband (the art director) into doing all the creative work. 

   Naturally, Maxi triumphs. 
Not only does she save the Amberville empire, she also sells more first issues than any magazine in history except Life. 
Like so many other denizens of Krantzland, she charms the average viewer by being guileless, self-deprecating and inept, while all around her competent, high-powered people exclaim that she is amazing, phenomenal, incredible. 
No wonder these fantasies work; they invite the public to gaze upon the glossy surface of success, and see there the comforting face of mediocrity. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
