ID: 153	RANK: 74	SCORE: 5.260906
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880609-0168 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: On Film: Midler and Tomlin Times Two </HL>
<AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   The simplest way to describe the difference between the old Disney and the new Disney is this: Hayley Mills has given way to Bette Midler. 

   This obvious conclusion didn't occur to me until after I saw "Big Business," the latest breezy farce from Disney's Touchstone Pictures. 
Though not quite up to "The Parent Trap," the movie that marked the apex of my own Hayleyolatry, "Big Business" is also the story of twins reunited years after early separation. 

   In movies of the early 1960s, ranging from "Pollyanna" to "That Darn Cat," Ms. Mills exemplified the Disney ideal: She was feisty yet genteel; high-spirited yet good-natured; a tomboy yet always a girl. 

   No one is likely to describe Ms. Midler as either Pollyanna or as a girl. 
She is a high-octane woman whose pungent vulgarity has set the tone for the Disney of the '80s in "Down and Out in Beverly Hills," "Ruthless People" and "Outrageous Fortune." 
These pictures were all distributed under the Touchstone label and were all aimed at adults who were or could have been Hayley fans. 

   Physical characteristics aside, is Disney's Bette really all that different from Disney's Hayley? 
In a grown-up, '80s kind of way, isn't Ms. Midler feisty yet genteel; high-spirited yet good-natured? 
And in these days of girls' soccer leagues, even Hayley wouldn't have to be a tomboy anymore. 

   Of course, "Big Business" isn't really "The Parent Trap." 
For one thing, there are two sets of identical twins -- one set born to rich New Yorkers, the other to dirt-farmer West Virginians -- who get separated at birth. 
An added complication: Both sets of twins are born at the same hospital and mixed up, so that one mixed pair is brought up city-rich; the other, country-poor. 

   The story catches up with the twins, both called Sadie and Rose, as adults. 
Ms. Midler, who once gave a bravura performance in a movie called "The Rose," plays the Sadies. 
Here, the Rose -- or Roses -- is Lily Tomlin. 

   The movie, from a script by novice screen writers Dori Pierson and Marc Rubel, who are first cousins, makes its points about roots and heritage without squashing the froth. (For example, besides their duplicative appearance, the Sadies are shown to share bloodlines by the fact they both like polka dots.) 

   Director Jim Abrahams, in his first effort without the Zucker brothers -- his co-directors on such films as "Ruthless People" and "Airplane!" -- keeps it all zipping along. 

   Where it's all zipping to is the meeting of the twins. 
The city "sisters" are chief officers of a conglomerate that owns, among other things, the furniture factory in Juniper Hollow, the burg where all the twins were born. 
City Sadie wants to sell the factory to a ruthless developer; the country "sisters" come to New York to try and stop the sale at the stockholder meeting. 

   Somewhat tamer than the previous Midler-Disney collaborations, "Big Business" is still peppy enough. 
As City Sadie, the corporate queen, Ms. Midler gets the most pointed, and the funniest, lines, which she delivers like the seasoned pro she is. 
She first appears on-screen as a large hat and a short white cape, teetering forward propulsively. 
As always, her great charm is her ability to transform herself from imperious monster into someone sweet and charming. 
The Country Sadie's hereditary avarice has been tempered by her rural upbringing. 

   This little romp doesn't miss a cliche. 
The city sisters' corporate lieutenants are a supercilious pair of homosexual lovers. 
The main task of Edward Herrmann, who plays one of them, is to supply befuddled reactions to the identity confusion that provides nearly all of the movie's jokes. 
The man who ably portrayed Franklin Delano Roosevelt twice on television proves himself quite capable of goggling at a woman who isn't behaving as expected. 

   Ms. Tomlin has some nice moments as City Rose, a flaky flower child who has never felt at home in the Manhattan fast lane. 
And as Country Rose, a strong-willed woman leading the fight against the corporate sell-out, she hints at the kind of extreme eccentrics she's brilliantly portrayed on stage and television. 
But often she seems subdued, as though she can't figure exactly how to float onto this farce flying by. 

   It does fly. 
Without revealing the ending I can say the twins get their various affairs settled in just 94 minutes, 35 minutes less than it took the bifurcated Hayley to reconcile her separated mother and father in "The Parent Trap." 

   ---
   Australian producer, writer and cinematographer David Parker studied mechanical engineering before he gave it up for photography and film. 
Now he's indulged his fascination with gadgetry in his quirky new comedy, "Rikky and Pete." 

   He's working again with director and producer Nadia Tass, with whom he made the Australian hit "Malcolm." 

   "Rikky and Pete" is a little charmer filled with the laconic humor that seems to be an Australian specialty and a flock of odd-duck characters. 
The story ambles along: The adult children of a rich crank from Melbourne drive across the desert to a remote mining camp where they find a place for their idiosyncratic talents. 
She, Rikky (Nina Landis), is a geologist and a folk singer; Pete (Stephen Kearney) is an inventor of Rube Goldbergesque contraptions. 
Both are quite appealing. 

   Mr. Kearney, who is part of a comedy duo called Los Trios Ringbarkus, peers out at the world with a dazed expression that seems, inexplicably, both very funny and very sad. 
You believe he could hound with a series of annoying gags the policeman who crippled his mother in a car accident, and that he would invent a piece of mechanical art that systematically splatters eggs with a hammer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
