ID: 153	RANK: 99	SCORE: 5.083316
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881021-0144 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: The Gallery: The Real Cleopatra </HL>
<AUTHOR> Manuela Hoelterhoff </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   If Cleopatra brings to mind a top-heavy diet queen with thick mascara and wigs big enough to hide a large snack and Dick's bottle, thank Hollywood. 
The real Cleopatra kept her hair in a bun and lived a monogamous life. 

   Neither did anybody, except maybe Marc Antony in his drunkest moments, call her beautiful. 
But when it came to brains, ambition and conversation, few could match her, least of all Antony's wife back home in Rome, the prim Octavia. 
With Cleopatra's suicide at age 39 -- perhaps by asp -- Egypt lost its last chance to glitter in the Mediterranean world. 

   These centuries of slow collapse are the subject of a new show at the Brooklyn Museum, "Cleopatra's Egypt: Age of the Ptolemies." 
On view are 140 works of art -- statues, carvings, elaborately wrought jewelry, vessels and coins -- dating to the time when Egypt was ruled by the Macedonian dynasty founded by Ptolemy, a marshal in Alexander the Great's army. 
Alexander, who gazes heavenward in a dashing little portrait bust, laid out Alexandria in the Nile's delta before he died in 323 B.C. 

   Under the Ptolemies, Alexandria turned into a sprawling, splashy capital, geographically and mentally remote from the high-minded ways of republican Rome, which increasingly filled the political vacuum left by Alexander. 
In the catalog you can read the reaction of a visiting Roman philosopher whose Stoic sensibilities were terribly offended by a particularly fat Ptolemy who liked to parade in public wearing nothing but a gossamer slip. 

   The pharaoh's jowly face decorates a coin -- one of the show's many coins and many Ptolemies. 
Keeping track of them all must be a scholar's dream: "The struggle between Ptolemy VIII's wife, Cleopatra II who was also his sister, and her daughter by an earlier marriage to Ptolemy VI, Cleopatra III, whom he also married, was to continue into the first century B.C., as his sons Ptolemy IX Soter II, and Ptolemy X Alexander I, vied with each other and Cleopatra II for control of the country." 

   While the Greek Ptolemies were sorting themselves out, the rest of Egypt trudged along as in time immemorial. 
Native priests officiated in the temples. 
Native artists chiseled and painted in long established styles with little interference and probably little comprehension from the Ptolemies, producing art that ranged from the most dreadful figurines to such sublime pieces as the bald green head, a symbolic portrait of old age, on loan to the show from the Egyptian Museum in West Berlin. 
Of the Ptolemies, only Cleopatra knew how to read hieroglyphs, though they all liked to assume for themselves the grandeur of the past by donning pharaonic regalia for ceremonial purposes. 

   Cleopatra herself appears on a stele in a pharaoh's kilt and double crown, and in a flattering early Roman marble. 
A portrait head of her bony-faced lover, Julius Caesar, is available for inspection nearby, sculpted by a Roman artist. 
Of Marc Antony few statues survive, most having been destroyed after he abandoned Rome to rule Egypt for nine years with Cleopatra. 
Had they sailed to victory against Rome at the Battle of Actium in 31 B.C., the middle-aged couple might have changed the destiny of the world. 
Instead they inspired a great play and a movie that nearly wrecked Rome while Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton were making it there. 

   Antony killed himself with his sword. 
Cleopatra, hearing that the victorious Octavian (later Augustus Caesar) planned to drag her through Rome, reached into a basket of figs. 
"Come, thou mortal wretch with thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate of life at once untie," she says in Shakespeare's play, pulling out some serpents. 

   Octavian ordered up a lavish funeral and turned Egypt into his private property. 
The exhibition's final room suggests that the death of the last Ptolemy was not a new dawn for Egypt. 
Particularly grotesque is the colossal head of Caracalla, who littered the sands with horrible monuments to himself and butchered part of Alexandria's population for laughing at him. 
Today, we laugh at performances of "Aida" complete with elephants at the Roman baths that bear his name. 

   There is also an outsized, shiny, Egyptian-style statue of Hadrian's catamite Antinous, who drowned in the Nile. 
Its bad taste, choice of material (rose-colored marble) and bland expression resembles if only in physiognomy our own era's pharaonic Donald Trump. 

   Supported in part by a grant from the National Westminster Bank USA, "Cleopatra's Egypt" is installed in a modestly done up space on the museum's ground floor through Jan. 2. 
Somebody clearly got a good deal on sea-green paint, which covers everything from walls to wall labels. 
These might well be more forthcoming. 
What on earth is a "symplegma" visitors might well wonder staring at an amazing conversation piece showing a woman attended to by flamboyantly nude fellows. 
Maybe the Detroit Institute of Arts will take a deeper plunge into the explication of Ptolemaic pornography when the show arrives there Feb. 14. 

   ---
   In 1795, the last king of Poland was forced to abdicate and his country disappeared into the gaping maws of Prussia, Russia and Austria. 
But even as Poland ceased to exist on maps, the country never left the realm of art, where painters nurtured its identity and extolled the natural beauty of a landscape that is today somewhat blemished by industrial plants and at least one prominent comrade in sunglasses. 
Just how rich Poland was in talent at a time it technically didn't exist, is evident from the exhibition of "Nineteenth Century Polish Painting," borrowed from museums in Cracow, Warsaw, Poznan, Lodz and Bialystok, and now at New York's National Academy of Design. 

   Some of the works hold spiritual power for Poles who grow up with reproductions of say, Jozef Chelmonski's nostalgic image of a young girl dreaming on the seashore, or his snow-blown partridges picking through a lonely landscape. 
It is one of several wintry scenes painted with a moody brush more influenced by realism than the prismatic style of impressionism. 
I was particularly taken by Jozef Brandt's atmospheric evocation of a 17th-century battle won by the Polish army, and Alfred Wierusz-Kowalski's picturesque horsedrawn sled pushing through a snowy night. 

   An added bonus is an 18th-century view of Warsaw by Bernardo Bellotto that shows this town the way it looked (splendid) before the Nazis blew much of it up. 
The exhibition is on view through Nov. 27; the excellent catalog by Agnieszka Morawinska costs $30. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
