ID: 283	RANK: 1	SCORE: 24.720388
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880205-0097 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Quilting: Stitches in Time </HL>
<AUTHOR> Gail King </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Louisville, Ky.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "Quilts and Coverups," a national sampling of contemporary quilting, will hang in the Louisville Art Gallery all this month. 
This is an appropriate time and place to consider such covers. 
Quilts piled high on a straw mattress and old, worn quilts stuffed in the chinks between the logs kept many a Kentucky pioneer from freezing to death. 
A bearskin would have been more efficient and easier to get, but frontier quilts had a significance far beyond utility. 
They were artistic expressions for women whose lives consisted of exhausting and endless work, lives made from scratch, with no frills. 

   Colonial American women had a long heritage of quilting behind them; for generations their mothers had been quilting bedclothes of appliqued and needlework designs or "crazy quilts" of patchwork. 
Quilting dates back to medieval Europe, where quilted undershirts were worn under armor, and beyond that to the Middle East and China. 
It involves sandwiching stuffing between two layers of fabric and then stitching ("quilting") through all three layers to keep the stuffing in place. 

   Designed patchwork, however, is strictly an American folk art. 
To make maximum use of cloth scraps and bits of fabric from worn clothing, American women developed geometrically based symmetrical patterns: Log Cabin, Wedding Band, Grandmother's Flower Garden, Ohio Rose, Drunkard's Path, Whig Rose. 

   As frontier conditions eased, more fabrics became available and frugality gave way to extravagance. 
What had been strictly functional became decorative. (Women were more careful with their "company" quilts, which accounts for the high quality of most antique quilts. 
"Utility" quilts ended up under a saddle or between the chinks.) 

   Modern fabric artists, free of the press of necessity, continue and expand the decorative tradition with exuberant mixes of old and innovative. 
The quilts in this show are "wall warmers," meant to hang, not to cover a bed, and they are generally smaller than bedcovers. 
They are lovely. 

   Anyone who equates quilting with cutsey-poo ducks and piggies or sets of matched calicos, the sort of thing one can buy in kits, is in for a jolt. 
The only animals in this show are Nancy N. Erickson's surreal velvet and satin rabbits and capybaras. 
But even the silk-screen prints, painted fabrics and glitzy appliques that hang in this show demonstrate a strong relationship with traditional American quilting. 

   The Thursday Tea Quilters, a group of Methodist (and meticulous) quilters, viewed the show with me. 
The members' expertise is traditional quilts; they think of themselves as seamstresses, not artists. 
Their high standards focus on color combinations and quilting stitches. 
They found it easy to believe that the exhibitors are artists first and needle workers second. 
They did, however, find some superior stitching, especially in ". . . and a Prosperous New Year," the most unorthodox quilt in the show. 

   Teresa Tucker Young designed it as part of a series of works representing life in the 1920s. 
She appliqued figures over large swathes of printed cotton and then quilted the whole thing, using quilting patterns that stress the fabric designs. 
Her picture shows flamboyantly optimistic party goers on the eve of 1929, their dreams for the coming year in cartoon bubbles above their heads, with Baby 1929 carrying a calendar turned to Oct. 24. 
And the quilt sports some genuine metal accessories: diaper pins, silver rings and a watch. 

   Younger viewers see timely humor in this place, but there is stark irony apparent to older Kentucky women. 
They remember that the hard times of the '20s and '30s brought a renewal of quilting to Kentucky, when families needed warm covers and when art supplies were an unaffordable luxury. 

   Nineteenth-century quilters in Appalachia and other hard-pressed areas worked out designs to make use of slivers and tiny squares. 
Nearly all of the quilts in this show include geometric patchwork, either as the allover design or as accent. 
Traditional quilters use dozens of "log cabin" (vertical pieces of various lengths) and "postage stamp" (thumb-size) patterns. 
In this show the best example of that tradition is Zoe Enright's "Postage Rose," a large rose design built of tiny calico squares and quilted in a circular, flowerlike design. 

   Linda MacDonald's magnificent "Dusk," a large patchwork quilt, is a lesson in old and new. 
She has blended pinks and lavenders with accents of off-white, black and brown in a diagonally symmetrical pattern and then used a fantastic variety of quilting stitch patterns to give the piece depth. 
It could never be mistaken for a "traditional" quilt, and yet there's a feeling of comfort about it. 
One of the Thursday Tea Ladies said, "It's beautiful, but it looks like it could be used; it would keep you warm." 

   ---
   Ms. King is a free-lance writer based in Henderson, Ky. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
