ID: 283	RANK: 43	SCORE: 11.370480
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880803-0135 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Baskets in the Barn </HL>
<AUTHOR> Gail King </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Athens, Ohio  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The setting couldn't be more rural -- a huge old dairy barn on the fringe of Appalachia. 
But inside instead of cows you'll find crafts -- chic works of art, mind you, not something Granny pieced together. 
This is the Dairy Barn, and during the past decade connoisseurs across the country have come to know it as "the place in Ohio" for high-quality traditional crafts. 

   The barn was built early this century as part of Ohio's farm-therapy program for the mentally ill. 
It was seven days from demolition in 1977 when the governor granted a temporary stay to allow it to house an arts-and-crafts show. 
That exhibit grew into Quilt National, a biennial event that is the nation's premier showcase for contemporary quilts. 
The Dairy Barn's reputation for excellence has expanded with shows including furniture, decorative arts, works in wood, musical instruments and jigsaw puzzles. 
And most recently, the barn was full of baskets. 

   The Dairy Barn displayed two very different collections of the basket weaver's art: "BasketWeave," a juried show, and "Baskets of Southwestern China," the private collection of Cynthia W. Taylor. 

   Traditional baskets, woven of natural fiber with an opening for putting something inside and a construction sturdy enough to hold or transport that something, inspired and underlined the "BasketWeave" show. 
But there was an invigorating mix of nontraditional "basketry," constructed of wire, shredded dollar bills, copper strips, canvas, metallic ribbon, film negative and glazed clay, several with no pretense of holding anything. 
And there were some delightful bits of whimsy: woven collars and a couple of superb animal masks (turned upside down both the eagle and the jackass make functional baskets). 

   Susan Payne Newman, who coordinated this juried show, said the pieces were picked on the basis of design and technical quality with an eye to presenting a cross-section of current basket making. 
Items ranged in size from an exquisite three-inch woven sterling silver traditional basket with base, handle and rim of hand-carved cherry to a five-foot-tall random-weave circular affair made of grapevine. 
While several price tags topped $1,000, most ran from $200 to $500. 
Ms. Newman said baskets of comparable quality can be found in galleries and museum shops or through regional basketry guilds. 

   The show's top prize went to Marian Haigh-Neal of Austin, Texas, for her "Thorn Basket." 
The airy creation was made of glazed clay with a woven basketlike bottom of pale pink that shaded into muted blues at the thorn-crusted rim. 

   A traditional piece called "Harvest Basket," by Jonathan Kline, was my favorite. 
The bottom of this creation had a pronounced and intricately woven inner crown that would make emptying the basket a treat. (But then again, how many people actually put/store/carry things in baskets for which they've paid $375?) 

   "Basket makers are more and more pushing the traditional limits of material and form," Ms. Newman said. 
She made her point with two traditional baskets: Janice A. Larson's "Earth and Sky Basket," a large raffia basket with a nontraditional woven flange "collar" made of fabric, handmade paper and cord in shades from aquamarine to purple; and Leon and Sharon Niehues's "Gilbert's Armour," a white oak basket woven with arresting symmetry into a modified traditional urnlike form. 

   David W. Stearns, a basket-maker from Hartford, Conn., sent a note with his entries that could have been the keynote of "BasketWeave." 
"All of my baskets are 'containers,' built to hold something. 
But beyond that, I want them to have the power to hold more -- to hold the weightlessness of imagination and fantasy." 

   As American basketry creeps from craft to art, from functional vessels for carrying corn and coal to art for transporting fantasy, it is good to take a second look at "old" basketry. 
The Dairy Barn managers did just that. 
The second set of baskets in this dual exhibit, "Baskets of Southwestern China," added enormously to the impact of "BasketWeave." 

   Ms. Taylor collected and curated the Chinese baskets. 
She spent a year in China with her two children and her husband, an exchange teacher at Sichuan University of Finance and Economics in Chengdu. 
Officially she taught oral English; unofficially she collected baskets. 
Having co-authored a book about Appalachian white oak basketry, she knew enough to ask the right questions. 
Except for one baby basket, which she bought out from under the baby, she purchased all her baskets new in marketplaces in Sichuan and Yunnan. 

   "In China baskets have little material value," Ms. Taylor said. 
"The price of a typical market basket ranges from a quarter to a few dollars in equivalent U.S. currency. 
No one collects baskets or displays them. 
Baskets are simply used, and used, until they wear out." 

   Ms. Taylor backed her baskets with color photographs of the baskets in use: kitchen baskets, baskets for catching and holding and cooking eels, baskets for carrying tools and eggs and noodles and babies, baskets that ride on poles or shoulders or backs or bicycles. 
"Baskets of Southwestern China" made a superb study of everyday Chinese life because of Ms. Taylor's photographs and lucid notes. 

   These baskets were structured to serve mundane needs, but were works of beauty nonetheless. 
A "fancy basket" with complicated weaves in brilliant colors and a bamboo "warmer" basket with an exquisite woven-wire top proved that form and function can go hand in hand. 

   The "BasketWeave" show will go on the road in a few weeks (the Dairy Barn should know the schedule in September). 
Coming events at the Barn include "Patterns Worth Repeating," a show and sale of traditional quilts (Aug. 11-28); "The Music Makers," a national exhibition of contemporary hand-made musical instruments (Sept. 17-Oct. 16); and "Quilt National '89" (June-July, 1989). 
For a complete schedule of events write: Dairy Barn, Box 747, Athens, Ohio 45701. 

   ---
   Ms. King is a free-lance writer based in Henderson, Ky. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
