ID: 243	RANK: 49	SCORE: 13.410526
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880108-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> Turbulence Ahead: Federal Express Faces Challenges to Its Grip On Overnight Delivery --- UPS and Facsimile Machines Target Same Customers; Are the Trucks Too Clean? --- Our Reporter Follows Parcel </HL>
<AUTHOR> Larry Reibstein (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> FDX </CO>
<IN> AIR </IN>
<DATELINE> LONGWOOD, Fla.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Linda Fournier bounds up the steps into the reception area, carrying a package filled with back issues of The Wall Street Journal. 
Just before she hands it over, she whips a device from her pocket that reads the envelope's bar code and lets her type in the receptionist's name and the location. 

   It is 9:30 a.m., and a package that was picked up in New York at 7:10 the night before has arrived at its destination, a radio station in suburban Orlando. 
After the delivery, Ms. Fournier returns to her truck and transmits the data she has collected to a computer in Memphis, Tenn. 
That lets Federal Express Corp. know that it has absolutely, positively delivered the goods again. 

   With technology like this, the company that invented the overnight-express business 14 years ago still dominates it. 
Federal Express collects more than half the revenue in what is now more than a $6 billion industry. 
And at a time when deteriorating service is a national malady, this company claims to deliver more than 99% of its letters and packages on time. 

   But Federal Express faces some major obstacles in the months ahead. 
Its heady days of 40% annual growth are over. 
The market for its core business -- shipping documents -- is saturated, forcing it to expand in areas like box hauling from warehouses. 
Its very mode of delivery is being challenged by new technology, most notably facsimile machines. 

   And now, casting the biggest shadow of all, comes United Parcel Service. 
This package-delivery giant is muscling into the overnight-express business, and it aims to grab a large piece of it. 
"It's the immovable object vs. the irresistible force," says Bernard La Londe, a transportation consultant. 

   To the people at Federal Express -- employees as well as managers -- this is no mere business challenge. 
They see it as a battle between good and evil, symbolized by such matchups as the lively orange and purple colors of Federal vs. the dull brown trucks and uniforms of UPS; the easygoing velvet-glove management of Federal vs. the stopwatch, highly engineered UPS style; Federal's up-the-ranks complaint system vs. 
UPS's union-grievance procedures; and publicly traded Federal vs. closely held UPS. 

   Frederick W. Smith, Federal's youthful founder and chairman, puts it this way: "UPS is like -- I don't mean this disrespectfully -- the Politburo. 
And with those zillion brown trucks, like the Russian army." 

   But the Russians still have a way of throwing their weight around. 
With an estimated $9 billion in revenue last year, UPS, based in Greenwich, Conn., is about three times the size of Federal Express. 
That has given it the resources to build its overnight-delivery business from nearly zilch to an estimated $1.3 billion annually in five years. 
Already it has forced Federal to cut some prices, which may preserve customers but eats into historically lush profit margins. 

   Now UPS is spending millions of dollars to develop technology that will give it many of the same luxury services that Federal offers and enable it to truly go head to head -- features like on-call pickup and continuous tracking of packages. 
UPS has also opened storefront counters and letter drop-boxes, and on Jan. 1, it began offering air-express customers their money back if packages aren't delivered on time. 
It claims that it now delivers 99.5% of its packages by the noon deadline. 

   Though it is adding these services long after Federal, UPS views its prospects with the cockiness that might be expected of an industry giant. 
"Our goal is not to chase them, our job is to leapfrog them," says Robert Hughes, the company's strategic-planning manager. 

   Those are fighting words to proud Federal Express, and it doesn't want to give an inch. 
"We feel our God-given right is 100% of the overnight-express business," says Theodore L. Weise, the senior vice president for domestic ground operations. 

   A look at the path of one package through the Federal Express system shows how the company works and how it is trying to hold its ground. 
Accompanied by this reporter, the parcel starts its journey at 7:10 on a Wednesday evening in the Journal's visitor-message center at the World Financial Center in New York. 
There Raymond Harley, a Federal courier, checks the addresses on the packages he has picked up, leafs through a book that translates ZIP codes into Federal's own code numbers, and writes the Federal numbers on the packages to guide them through the main sorting hub in Memphis. 

   On the Journal's envelope Mr. Harley writes the code SFB, and then he gathers all of the packages together and heads out to his van. 
Once inside, he hits a button on a small computer terminal that lists his stops and flashes several special pickup requests from a dispatch center in Manhattan. 

   UPS drivers, by contrast, get a list of customer stops before they go out, and can't communicate with dispatchers from their trucks. 
In fact, UPS industrial engineers study each facet of a worker's task and then dictate, for example, how fast a driver should walk from his truck to a customer's door. 

   Federal drivers are left to their own devices in meeting deadlines. 
But by 7:20 p.m., Mr. Harley is ready to transfer his 60 packages to another van, which takes them to a lower Manhattan sorting station. 

   Cargo handlers there, wearing headsets attached to a scanning device, listen for the beep that indicates that our package's bar code -- which represents the airbill number -- has registered. 
The scanner reading, which is beamed to the Memphis computer, is the first of many that will allow Federal to track our envelope. 
Then the package is taken with a truckful of others to Newark, N.J., where it is loaded into the belly of a Boeing 727. 
By 11:31 p.m., it is airborne, and it lands in Memphis at 1:24 a.m. 

   From 11 p.m. to 3 a.m. each night, 3,000 workers at Federal's national hub sort 880,000 packages as the parcels wend their way through a 65-mile-long labyrinth of conveyor belts and chutes. 
Documents are first sorted manually by the workers -- mostly part-time college students -- who type the destination codes into a computer before sending the packages along on the belt. 
The computer determines how many seconds it will take for a parcel to reach the mouth of the right chute, where a mechanical arm will shoot out and direct it to the right region. 
Then the packages will be sorted once again for the proper city and loaded onto another plane. 

   At 3:30 a.m., Capt. Frank Groner and two crew members take off for Orlando. 
Mr. Groner is part of the minority among Federal's 900 pilots who don't have military backgrounds. 
Founder Smith favors veterans; he was a Marine pilot in Vietnam himself, and he admires the military's gung-ho spirit. 
A poster at the hub declares: "Anything Less Than 100% Is Unacceptable. 
Show No Mercy. 
Take No Prisoners." 
And a program bearing the Navy nickname "Bravo Zulu" gives cash or gift awards to employees who perform above and beyond the call of duty. 

   Mr. Groner touches down at the Orlando airport at 5:54 a.m., and a dumpster-size container carrying our package is rolled onto a truck bound for a sorting center in Longwood, Fla. 
At 7:35, Ms. Fournier plucks the envelope from a conveyor belt there. 
Soon, it is nestled in a van full of other packages and envelopes. 
At 8:10, Ms. Fournier pulls away from the sorting center to begin her round of 38 deliveries. 
From start to finish, the operation has been a human and technological tour de force. 

   More of one, perhaps, than some people want to pay for. 
Fantastic Sams International Inc., for one, has switched its $5,000-a-month account to UPS. Federal's computerized tracking system is superior, says Victor Johnson, the traffic manager for the Memphis hair-care franchiser. 
But, he adds, "So what? 
UPS can get the package there by noon all the time. 
Federal is a good company, its trucks are cleaner, but I'm not that worried about how clean a truck is." 

   Chairman Smith concedes that competition has made customers more prickly about price. 
Federal's basic overnight letter rate is $11, after all, and UPS's is $8.50. 
But Mr. Smith insists that extra service sets Federal apart and that in an era of intensifying competition, that is what's important. 
"The trick now is to keep differentiating," he says. 

   That wasn't the case before Mr. Smith hatched Federal Express, because there was no industry. 
As a Yale undergraduate in 1965, Mr. Smith wrote an economics paper criticizing the slow, unreliable cargo services available then and proposing an independent air-service system. 
His professor, believing the idea futile, gave the paper a C. 

   But Mr. Smith started such a delivery business anyway, in April 1973, at the age of 28. 
At first, it still didn't seem like an "A" idea. 
Federal Express had 14 planes but handled only 20 packages the first month. 
The company was partly staked by $8 million from a family trust of Mr. Smith's, but it had to turn repeatedly to banks and venture capitalists for more money in the early years. 
One time, Mr. Smith met part of a payroll using $27,000 he had won in blackjack. 

   Only after the airline industry was deregulated in November 1977 did Federal Express begin to take off. 
Once it was no longer restricted to 7,500 pounds of freight a plane, it made sense to buy larger airplanes and use its smaller Falcon aircraft to expand into small and medium-size markets. 
The company's operating profit rose from $19.5 million on revenue of $160.3 million in fiscal 1978 to $167 million on revenue of $3.18 billion in the year ended May 31. 

   Unlike many founding entrepreneurs, Mr. Smith has retained firm control of the company and continued to set an energetic tone. 
When bad weather hits Memphis, he often pops over to the airport hub from corporate headquarters to keep up morale. 
He personally hears final appeals of employee grievances, along with other senior managers, each week. 
And he proselytizes, telling employees that they are involved in moving "the most important commerce ever moved" and frowning on anything less than maximum effort. 
"We have high standards and will terminate people if they don't perform," he says. 
"If you brook mediocrity, eventually you will become mediocre. 
We make no apologies for that." 

   As top strategist, however, Mr. Smith doesn't have a flawless track record. 
ZapMail, a document-transmission service, was started as a major diversification effort and proved a major embarrassment. 
Following a three-year effort, it was closed in September 1986 after a $190 million write-off. 
Mr. Smith says it proved to be "tremendously more complex" than expected. 

   But he doesn't apologize for the idea, because ZapMail was an effort to address a real and continuing problem. 
Facsimile machines, which transmit documents over telephone lines, are eating into Federal's overnight business. 
In just one year, the growth rate of Federal's letter shipments has been cut in half, to about 25%. 

   That's one big reason that Federal has begun to focus more on big-box delivery, or the "back-door" loading-dock trade. 
But that move is risky, too. 
It targets a very different crowd from the white-collar clientele of Federal's "front-door" document-delivery business, and the company has had to fine-tune its marketing. 
A big new ad campaign shows transmission companies and fish producers sending big boxes, and the "absolutely, positively" tagline has been dropped. 

   The foray into boxes also moves Federal squarely into UPS's bailiwick. 
In the past, UPS's big brown trucks have crowded out most of the competition for the "back door" market. 
Timing may be a problem, too. 
Federal is opening up this battle front just as UPS is launching its attack on Federal's overnight business. 

   So whom do the experts like in this high-stakes confrontation? 
Most are betting that Federal can prevail in the overnight market as long as it cuts its costs enough to keep its prices within hailing distance of UPS's. 
They argue that certain intangibles favor the reigning champ over the challenger. 
Says Kevin Murphy, a Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. analyst, "There's a little bit of the Ayn Rand type of characters down there -- freedom-fighting heroes, an intense pride." 

   ---
   Challenging Federal Express in Overnight Mail
   1988 Shares of the Overnight Air-Express Package-Delivery Market
 Federal Express ..................... 58%
 United Parcel Service ............... 15%
 Airborne Express .................... 11%
 Emery/Purolator ..................... 10%
 DHL Worldwide Express ...............  3%
 Burlington ..........................  1%
 Others ..............................  2%
   Source: Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
