ID: 243	RANK: 67	SCORE: 12.062124
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870618-0090 </DOCNO>
<HL> Business Bulletin:
A Special Background Report
On Trends in Industry
And Finance
---
By Lynn Asinoff</HL>
<DD> 06/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PETROLEUM (PET)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
COMPUTERS (EDP)
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<TEXT>
   HIGHER OIL PRICES hit the economy, for better and worse. 

   With the price of oil running about $18 a barrel, or $4 above last year, economists see positive stirrings in the oil patch as some companies start to drill again. 
"That is going to do a lot for us here in Pittsburgh and other places," says W. Lee Hoskins, chief economist at Pittsburgh National Bank, noting that drilling will increase demand for steel pipe and other materials. 
That, he says, bolsters his prediction of 3% real growth in the economy in the second half. 

   Some, however, are jittery about the effect on inflation. 
Recent price increases are yet to be fully reflected at the gas pump. 
Moreover, the likelihood of a big price increase is greater than a steep price drop. 
Lacy Hunt, chief economist at Carroll, McEntee &amp; McGinley Inc., predicts oil prices will push the inflation rate to above 6% for the second half. 
He says the per barrel price will be "in the mid-20s by 1989." 

   Current prices are "higher than virtually anyone forecast six months ago," says Jerry Jordan, chief economist of First Interstate Bank. 

   AUTOMATED ARTS: Computers perform for symphony, theater and ballet. 

   Declining prices for computer hardware prompt more arts organizations to go online. 
"It's a market that is just crying for automation," says Gary Biggs of Micro Consulting Inc., Dallas. 
His software, developed for the Dallas Opera, coordinates ticket-sales data with fund raising and even prints tickets automatically. 
Another program -- Orchestra Library Information Service -- lets orchestras find, say, all 19-minute cello pieces by German composers, plus the number and type of instruments required to play them. 

   American Ballet Theatre tours with three computers: one for payroll, one to plot rehearsal schedules and one to keep track of sets, lighting and costumes. 
ABT also has a computer that enables it to project audience turnout based on programming changes. 
Some theater groups now keep casting records on computer. 
The impact on patrons: Ticket buying may get quicker and easier, but those who buy tickets will be more likely to be asked for donations. 

   FISH PRICES SOAR, with demand growing faster than supply. 

   Healthier eating boosts per capita U.S. fish and seafood consumption to 14.7 pounds in 1986, up 20% since 1982. 
North Atlantic whitefish species are in greatest demand, pushing wholesale prices of frozen cod blocks to a record $1.80 a pound. 
That's up one third from last year, and prices could reach $2 by fall. 
Already there are flounder and sole shortages, with cod and haddock expected to be "extremely short" by the fall, says Bob Erkins of Erkins Seafood Letter in Bliss, Idaho. 

   Limited supply is the major problem. 
"Unlike carpets or cars, we can't turn on a machine and make more," says an industry official, who worries that stocks are being depleted. 
A weak U.S. dollar aggravates the situation. 
"We're trying to stabilize prices," says Gordon Cummings, president of Canadian processor National Sea Products Ltd., noting that rising prices could lead consumers to switch to other protein sources. 

   Still, mackerel stays cheap. 
Mr. Erkins explains why: "It isn't light and white. 
It's dark and oily." 

   RX ERRORS: Drugstore pharmacists catch an average of more than four prescription errors a week, says Drug Topics magazine. 
Most common: incorrect directions, duplication of drugs, drug interactions, underdosing and failure to discontinue drugs at the proper time. 

   SCANNING FOR VIDEO: Panasonic Co. introduces a videocassette recorder that reads bar codes to allow speedier programming. 
In response, a New Zealand group, News Media (AK Ltd.), begins marketing a software program that translates newspaper TV listings into bar codes. 

   BIGGER ISN'T BETTER when it comes to textbooks, say Stanford University researchers who compared textbooks from the U.S., Japan and Singapore. 
Their assessment: U.S. texts were bigger and full of pictures but suffered from poor writing, poor organization and too much information. 

   SWIMMING POOLS are hot sellers, particularly luxury designs. 

   Low interest rates and the ability to tap home-equity loans spur pool building. 
Sales are up 60% over last year at Pebble Pools Inc., Royersford, Pa., and 25% at Leisure World in Wilmington, Del. 
A Detroit-area pool builder says business is so brisk "that we don't have time to talk about it." 
Sales of pool pumps, lights and accessories are at "record levels" at KDI American Products Inc., North Hollywood, Calif. 

   In-ground pool prices start at about $15,000, but builders say demand is for the pricier models. 
"People want more elaborate pools with amenities such as rock work, waterfalls, brick and masonry," says Frank Geremia Sr. of Geremia Pools Inc., Sacramento, Calif. 
Remodeling of pools is also big, even though upgrading can cost as much as a new pool, says Kenneth Whitford of Lifetime Pools Inc., Palo Alto, Calif. 

   Diving boards and slides wane in popularity due to insurance problems, while demand for whirlpools and automatic pool cleaners grows. 

   BRIEFS: Dads get more popular. 
Father's Day phone calls this year will rise 17% to 33.4 million, says American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. . . . 
"A breath of fresh aria" is the way Chemical Bank promotes its free Metropolitan Opera concerts in New York City area parks. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
