ID: 243	RANK: 79	SCORE: 11.544191
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871217-0052 </DOCNO>
<HL> Japan Tries to Automate Tedious Job
Of Reading Human Genetic Blueprint
---
By Stephen Kreider Yoder
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/17/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FUJIY HIT JAPAN
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN>
<DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Determined to find a better way to learn the body's secrets, Japanese government planners enlisted a watch manufacturer, a computer-software house, a maker of photographic film, an electronics concern and a soda-ash firm. 

   It didn't matter that none had any experience in biology. 
The mission was to use their manufacturing expertise to automate a task that has long daunted scientists -- reading the body's internal blueprint. 

   Since embarking on the project in 1981, Japan's Science and Technology Agency has given 766 million yen ($5.8 million) to the five companies to design machines that automatically decipher DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, the genetic material that determines the development of every living organism. 

   Decoding genetic information -- a process known as DNA sequencing -- is increasingly regarded as top-priority research for future biotechnology industries. 
Biologists talk of compiling a catalog of all of the three billion pieces of genetic information in human DNA. 
Such data could hold many clues on how the body works and offer hope of treating various intractable diseases. 

   The work currently involves a tedious series of laboratory routines that researchers do largely by hand. 
This is where Japan sees a prime opportunity, because of its talent for applying established skills to new industries. 

   Seiko Electronic &amp; Instruments Co., for instance, is adapting high-precision watchmaking robots to move minute pieces of genetic material. 
Fuji Photo Film Co. has used its skills to streamline a time-consuming laboratory task. 
"We want to use all the technologies available: computers, material science, electronics, robots and biology," says Akiyoshi Wada, a professor of molecular biophysics at the University of Tokyo who masterminded the Japanese effort. 

   Two other Japanese academics, in a paper published by Cambridge University Press, go further: "Automation of complex laboratory procedures could turn out to be the equivalent of the industrial revolution in biological and biochemical laboratories," they say. 

   The Japanese weren't the first to think of automating the lab process. 
The European Molecular Biology Laboratory in Heidelberg, West Germany, has pioneered methods of automating DNA sequencing, as has California's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. 
Several U.S. companies, such as Du Pont Co. and Applied Biosystems Inc., have built DNA-sequencing machines. 
Officials from the Japanese science agency say the U.S. Department of Energy has spent millions of dollars more than Japan to decipher genetic data. 

   But Japan, with its engineering muscle, money and ability to coordinate academic, government and corporate efforts, appears to have the advantage. 
There is no question that the Japanese are ahead in automating DNA sequencing, says Leroy Hood, a biology professor at California Institute of Technology. 
Besides Seiko and Fuji, the participants in Japan's automation project are Hitachi Ltd., Toyo Soda Manufacturing Co. and Mitsui Group's Mitsui Knowledge Industry Co. 

   Today's DNA-sequencing labs work much like early auto factories, where each car was built by hand. 
Most of the steps are low-tech, test-tube-and-eyedropper routines. 
Scientists go through manual steps to break DNA into sections, reproduce it in bacteria, separate it, purify it, separate it further and make an image on film that can be analyzed visually. 
It is tedious, error-prone work that takes scientists away from more creative research. 

   Automation could help in several ways, says Mr. Wada of Tokyo University: "It's just like with cars or semiconductors. 
If you mass-produce, costs come down and quality control goes up." 

   The science agency's strategy of drawing on unrelated industries seems to be working. 
One of Seiko's rebuilt watchmaking robots, originally used to apply tiny drops of oil in watch gears, has an electronic "eye" that sees tiny cultures of DNA. 
A robot's tiny arm quickly moves the DNA bits to test tubes. 

   Fuji's film-making technology helped it produce a gelatinous substance sand wiched between two sheets of plastic. 
The gelatin is used to separate genes into a visible pattern something like the bar codes used on consumer products. 
Fuji and Hitachi have developed computers that translate the "bar code" into computer data. (Currently, scientists have to tediously prepare the gelatin by hand and sandwich it between pieces of glass.) 

   The Japanese science agency will begin next year to tie individual machines together into a small-scale DNA-sequencing assembly line for laboratories. 

   While academics such as Mr. Wada call for international cooperation in DNA sequencing, some Japanese corporate players prefer secrecy. 
Seiko officials refuse to discuss their involvement. 
Mr. Hood, the Cal Tech professor, says researchers from Japanese companies visit U.S. labs to gather information, but when it comes to reciprocating, they are "far more secretive than is desirable in the international scientific community." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
