ID: 243	RANK: 83	SCORE: 11.293688
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870527-0005 </DOCNO>
<HL> Postal Service Seeks to Dispel Bad Image
---
Tisch Pushes Competitiveness
And Courtesy
---
By Jeanne Saddler
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The U.S. Postal Service recently launched a "smile campaign" in New York City after customers complained about the dour faces that greeted them behind the counters of local post offices. 

   "If they want smiles, we'll smile," says Delores Martinez, manager of postal lobby operations for the city. 
"If they want dancing, we'll dance." 

   The Postal Service has been called many things, but eager to please generally hasn't been one of them. 
The service has long been derided as a surly, stodgy bureaucracy, and more recently has been rocked by internal scandal and turmoil. 
Now, though, under business-oriented Postmaster General Preston Robert Tisch, it is struggling to right itself by emphasizing concepts that have hardly been associated with it in recent years -- concepts like "service" and "marketing." 

   The goal, says Mr. Tisch, is to instill "a feeling of haste" among his troops. 
Seemingly unaware of the double meaning, he says he wants to make the service "a first-class vendor." 

   He clearly has a long way to go. 
As it engages in a new round of talks with its unions, the service is struggling to raise productivity and lower labor costs, which still consume 85 cents of every $1 of revenue. 
And many of its customers and would-be customers say the service is far from matching the performance of its main private-sector competitors, such as Federal Express Inc., the overnight delivery giant, and United Parcel Service, which in recent years has taken 80% of the package delivery market from the Postal Service. 

   "There's just more hustle in the brown uniforms (of UPS) than in the blue uniforms (of postal workers)," says John McLaughlin, executive director of Harvard University's Program on Information Resources Policy. 

   Postal managers contend they are making significant progress toward causing those assessments to be revised. 
In large part by offering incentives to customers to do some of their own sorting, the service says productivity increased 44% over the past decade. 
And the agency, a quasi-government company that is mandated by law to operate on at least break-even basis, has shown a small surplus for four of the past five years. 

   Now officials are setting new priorities in an effort to increase the service's competitiveness. 
One of the most important of those priorities is improving the performance of Express Mail, the overnight delivery service. 
Even though Express Mail is responsible for only about 1.5% of the $30 billion in postal revenue, Mr. Tisch says improving it is an important signal to the business community that postal officials want to meet changing demands. 

   The agency recently asked the independent Postal Rate Commission to approve lower fees and new services for Express Mail. 
"We have about 10% of the market and, in six or seven years, I foresee a 15% share," says the postmaster general. 
"It's good for us to fight for something and to build something." 

   At the same time, the service is trying to repair tattered relations with business and public customers. 
For instance, it has quietly cooled its largely unsuccessful efforts to get businesses to adopt the nine-digit zip code. 
Instead, the service will offer new discounts to customers who partially sort their mail by using computerized bar codes before putting it into the system. 

   The Postal Service also is trying to improve its relations with the general public. 
Personal cards and letters -- known to the trade as "Aunt Minnie mail" -- make up only 6% of all first-class mail. 
But officials say that much of the public derives its image of the Postal Service from such mundane dealings as buying stamps and other routine transactions. 
So there's a new emphasis on trying to make such transactions just a bit more pleasant. 

   In New York and some other cities, for example, the service is experimenting with computers that can tell customers how long they'll wait in line before being helped. 
Postal workers in several places also are being offered Dale Carnegie self-development courses. 
These are designed to boost the morale and self-esteem of the workers, in the hope that the benefits will rub off on their job performance and dealings with the public. 

   Mr. Tisch, the man behind this push for a better image, has impeccable corporate credentials. 
Before taking the postal job last August, the 61-year-old Mr. Tisch was president and chief operating officer of Loews Corp., a conglomerate controlled by his family. 

   As postmaster general, he succeeded former AMR Corp. Chairman Albert Casey, whose brief, seven-month tenure was mostly taken up with formulating an extensive reorganization plan and with coping with the fallout from a contracting scandal involving Peter Voss, a former member of the Postal Board of Governors who pleaded guilty to accepting gratuities and to fraud last year and is currently serving a four-year prison sentence. 

   Mr. Tisch is credited with easing congressional concerns about postal operations by quickly starting a new bidding process. 
His personal charm and casual manner also have boosted morale after Mr. Casey's brusque management style. 

   "I'm impressed with what Tisch has done so far," says Richard Barton, president of the Direct Marketing Association, a trade group. 
"His style is unabrasive and it lets the best come out in people under him." 

   But Mr. Tisch's relaxed management style also has prompted critics to charge he isn't enough of a strong, hands-on manager. 
At congressional hearings, he will usually pass off to subordinates any questions that require detailed responses. 
Mr. Tisch makes no apologies for his style or degree of involvement in the details of the mail system. 
"My approach is to really understand what's going on and to direct people to make things happen," he declares. 

   How Mr. Tisch manages the service's labor relations may ultimately determine whether his term will be regarded as a success. 
Both labor and management say they understand the need for better relations with each other and with the public. 
But analysts say that more fundamentally, the service must eventually come to grips with its dependence on a huge work force that's paid between a quarter and a third more than people in comparable private sector jobs, wage analysts say. 

   "If you think of what's happened to the pay rates of workers in the steel, automobile and airline industries -- the jobs we used to compare with postal service jobs -- postal workers have become the new aristocracy of American labor," says Harvard's Mr. McLaughlin, who researched such labor issues while employed at the Postal Service in the 1970s. 

   In the current round of labor talks, Mr. Tisch has tried to set a cooperative tone, personally opening the negotiations last month on a new three-year contract. 
But the good feeling dissipated somewhat two weeks later, when the agency announced that it's seeking a 16% average increase in postal rates. 
The American Postal Workers Union and the letter carriers' union accuses postal managers of timing the announcement so as to pressure the unions into accepting a more modest settlement or to blame them for higher postal rates. 

   But postal officials deny such maneuvers, and argue that an increase is inevitable, partly because of extra costs that will result from a new federal retirement system. 
(Mr. Tisch has recused himself from voting on increases because of Loews's stake in CBS, where his brother, Laurence, is chief executive officer; CBS's records division is a major mailer.) 

   Most attention during the labor talks will be focused on the issue of productivity, which has improved at a rate of about 1% annually in recent years, excluding customers' sorting efforts. 
Among other things, the Postal Service aims to boost productivity further by seeking to increase the percentage of part-time workers it can use; hiring more part-timers for peak periods, such as Christmas, means fewer full-timers hanging around in slack periods without enough to do. 
Contracts with the service's largest unions now limit parttimers to 5% of its work force. 

   Postal officials for years have expected their plants to use computer-based automatic letter sorters to boost productivity, but the recent contract-steering scandal slowed that progress. 
Although no contracts were actually awarded as a result of the scheme, it's estimated that the delay in procuring new equipment cost the Postal Service hundreds of millions of dollars. 
"That was the most expensive part of the thievery," says Democratic Rep. William Ford of Michigan, chairman of the House Post Office Committee. 

   Mr. Tisch, meanwhile, is trying to put those scandals behind the agency. 
Instead, he stresses the new atmosphere he's trying to create, which he says is far more important to the service's long-term success. 
"The imperative for change in what we do and how we do it is all around us," he says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
