ID: 243	RANK: 98	SCORE: 10.408508
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880812-0047 </DOCNO>
<HL> Rivals Seek to Chip Away At TV Guide's Dominance </HL>
<AUTHOR> Laura Landro and Johnnie L. Roberts (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> NWS </CO>
<IN> TNM PUB TEL </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Rupert Murdoch's purchase of TV Guide comes as the magazine faces profound changes and a slew of new competition in the market for television-programming publications. 

   Despite TV Guide's circulation of 17 million, a handful of competitors are moving into its territory with guides aimed directly at the nation's 42 million cable television subscribers. 
And a growing number of newspapers are providing more sophisticated TV program guides as part of their efforts to boost their own circulation. 

   "TV Guide's marketplace has changed dramatically since it was founded and there were only the broadcast networks and a few independent stations," says Alan Wragg, publisher of the Cable Guide, the largest of several guides serving cable subscribers. 
"There's a very good opportunity for other guides to produce a higher-quality publication aimed at the more sophisticated viewer with a broadening scope of programs available to them." 

   While only half of the nation's TV households are cable subscribers, more than 70% of the nation's TV households could receive cable within five years. 
Over 100 channels are now available, and more services are being developed. 

   Five companies are now publishing cable TV guides designed specifically for local cable systems; cable subscribers receive the guides monthly as part of their subscriber fees. 
TV Guide publishes lists of all broadcast and cable programs available in its 107 regional markets; the cable guides, in contrast, primarily publish listings for cable channels available on individual cable systems. 
The cable guides list specific channels on which programming appears, something TV Guide can't do when serving a region that might include dozens of cable systems. 

   The Cable Guide's publisher, TVSM Inc., in Horsham Pa., was purchased last year by an investor group led by Mark Edmiston, former president of Newsweek, and William Broyles, Newsweek's former editor and a founder of Texas Monthly. 
Crosby Vandenburgh Group Inc., Boston, publisher of the second-largest group of cable guides, earlier this year hired as its new president John Crowley Jr., an 18-year veteran of Time Inc.'s magazines. 
Crosby Vandenburgh publishes about 5.5 million guides for companies including cable giant Tele-Communications Inc. 

   Advertisers are starting to take notice. 
The Cable Guide, whose circulation rose to 7.2 million in this year's first half from 5.5 million a year earlier, expects to hit 10 million by 1990; in February it was voted hottest magazine of 1987 by Adweek after its advertising revenue grew 68%. 
Even so, its ad sales for the year are expected to total $35 million -- just one-tenth of what TV Guide is expected to report. 

   But Leo Scullin, director of print and new media at ad agency Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., says, "While TV Guide has the majority franchise, there's room for other nimble competitors to get a share of the market." 
Moreover, he says, "TV Guide has to pay attention to what the new competitors are doing and look to them for (ideas) to redeploy their present resources." 

   The cable guides are trying some innovations to aid subscribers. 
For example, the Cable Guide recently started a section called "Best Bets for VCR Programming" that includes bar codes for recommended programs. 
Readers with scanner-equipped videocassette recorders can use the bar codes to program their VCRs to record those shows. 

   Newspapers are also becoming more competitive, spending bundles to improve their own TV sections and accommodate cable listings. 
In recent months, the Dallas Morning News, Kansas City Star and New York Times have upgraded their Sunday TV supplements. 

   TV Guide has already taken notice. 
In July, it introduced its first cable edition, for subscribers of four New York City cable systems, and said it is looking for other large cable systems interested in exclusive weekly guides. 

   TV Guide officials concede that competitors, including newspapers and local cable guides, have cut into their circulation over the years. 
But Roger Youman, co-editor, says, "This magazine has been able to maintain an unprecedented high level of circulation in the face of all the competition." 

   Moreover, Mr. Youman adds, TV Guide has doubled programming information over the past decade, primarily to accommodate the growth in cable. 

   TV Guide is still glossier and more competitive than its cable guide competitors; it is also regarded as editorially superior for its articles about news and entertainment programming and industry trends. 
But Mr. Crowley of Cable Publications says his company is upgrading its editorial content and may enlarge its TV Guide-sized publications to regular magazine size. 

   John B. Evans, president of Murdoch Magazines, says TV Guide must go beyond providing comprehensive listings and compelling stories. 
As the number of channels skyrockets, "TV Guide will have to make more recommendations about programming than at present." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
