ID: 298	RANK: 34	SCORE: 15.614591
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870311-0053 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

High Demand and Reductions in Costs
---
By James P. Miller
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   After a five-year slump, U.S. lumber producers are enjoying an unexpectedly strong earnings rebound, brought about by the weakened dollar, record demand, and a variety of belt-tightening measures. 

   Lumber prices have firmed considerably from a year ago. 
And the apparent success last week of another in a recent string of price increases for linerboard spurred anew the months-long rise in stock prices for lumber companies. 
All of the major lumber concerns, after reporting robust earnings gains for the fourth quarter, are expected to show continued improvement when results for the current quarter are released. 

   The confluence of reduced operating costs and rising prices has proven timely. 
"Right at a time when the industry was getting the most dramatic declines in its cost structure, prices started to move up and you ended up with an earnings explosion," says S.G. Warburg &amp; Co. analyst John E. Maack, Jr., who expects lumber concerns' profits to level off at a new, higher earnings plateau in the second half of 1987. 

   "For the first time in the 1980s, all the major domestic and international market trends are working in our favor," said George Weyerhaeuser, Weyerhaeuser Co. president and chief executive officer, in predicting "a very strong performance in 1987" for the Tacoma, Wash.-based forest products giant. 
Other major producers, while tempering their optimism with concern over the future direction of lumber prices, also expect the upturn to continue this year. 

   The resurgence is only a few quarters old, however. 
While analysts expect lumber companies' 1987 profits will top 1986 figures, their long-term profit predictions also show concern over a fundamental industry overcapacity and the vagaries of the commodities market. 

   Many companies are seeing one-time earnings improvements after taking long-needed steps to pare costs and improve their competitive posture, industry observers say. 
Automation and renovation of mills is paying off through increased efficiency and smaller payrolls. 
Energy conservation measures and cheaper oil have drastically lowered energy expenses. 

   Probably the largest contributor to the earnings upturn for major producers is a new pay structure hammered out in the heavily unionized Pacific Northwest. 
In order to stay competitive with a proliferating number of small nonunion operations in the region, most companies have successfully squeezed substantial wage concessions from lumber unions. 
Although such efforts triggered a rash of unsuccessful strikes last summer, management's adoption of the new, aggressive posture "had to be done," says one analyst. 

   Boise Cascade Corp. President Jon Miller recently told New York analysts, for example, that the Boise, Idaho-based company will save $30 million annually as a result of new contracts it signed last year with lumber and paper mill workers. 
The reduction in operating costs, he told the group, is among the reasons "the company is in better shape today than at any time in its history." 

   In the early 1980s, a combination of increased imports and a drop in housing starts caused lumber prices to plummet. 
In response, most major lumber companies shifted their product mix to expand production of pulp and paper products, which up to then had been of decidedly secondary importance. 
Such products now provide more than half the revenue of many lumber companies. 

   Unlike lumber prices, pulp and paper are extremely dollar-sensitive, so a major part of the current earnings turnaround has been the tumble of the U.S. dollar. 
Its fall has sharply boosted lumber companies' overseas sales of pulp, linerboard and certain papers, which plunged when the dollar peaked last year. 
The renewed export market corrected a domestic oversupply of such products and helped U.S. pulp prices as well, making the industry one of only a handful to clearly benefit from the dollar's decline. 

   Lumber prices are much less sensitive to currency fluctuations, since U.S. producers export only a fraction of their output. 
But if lumber exports don't hold much significance for U.S. producers, lumber imports surely do. 
Domestic prices for wood products have been depressed in recent years largely because of a continuing influx of Canadian imports. 
Last year, Canadian softwood lumber represented about 31% of U.S. consumption. 

   The Canadian competition works to keep prices down despite record domestic softwood lumber consumption last year. 
The National Forest Products Association, a trade group, says U.S. softwood consumption in 1986 was a record 46.8 billion board feet. 
In comparison, consumption in 1985 was 44.2 billion board feet, and in 1982, during the slump, it was 31.2 billion board feet. 
Prices, however, have shown only modest improvement over the depressed levels of recent years, and haven't come close to the price spike of the glory years in the late 1970s. 

   U.S. complaints that the Canadian government was giving unfair subsidies to its mills recently pressured Canada into imposing a 15% tax on softwood lumber shipped to this country. 
While the tax's effect on U.S. producers isn't clear yet, analysts don't expect it to keep much Canadian lumber out of the U.S. 

   If major domestic producers can successfully take advantage of the tax to eke out a 5% lumber price hike, the increase would translate into substantial earnings gains for 1987, says Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. analyst Evadna Lynn. 
But their ability to win such an increase is far from certain, she notes. 
Ms. Lynn also warns that currently low prices for raw materials -- such as standing timber and energy -- are starting to inch upward, and will further pinch U.S. producers in the year's second half. 

   Construction of single-family residences, the largest and most vital part of lumber demand, is expected to nearly match the strong 1.2 million-unit pace of last year. 
The National Association of Home Builders of the U.S., whose outlook has often proven slightly conservative in the past, expects a 5% drop in such starts in 1987, to 1.1 million. 

   ---

                    LUMBER SHARES RISE
         Closing prices of major lumber producers
                           Dec. 1   March 10,   Percent
                            1986      1987      Change
    Georgia-Pacific        39 1/8    52         +32.9%
    Weyerhaeuser           38 3/4    55 1/8     +42.3
    Louisiana-Pacific      31        37 1/2     +21.0
    Boise Cascade          62        81 1/2     +31.5
    Potlatch               56 1/2    78         +38.1
    Willamette             44        59 1/2     +35.2
    Pope &amp; Talbot          22 5/8    42         +85.6

</TEXT>
</DOC>
