ID: 130	RANK: 29	SCORE: 16.230379
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880125-0168 </DOCNO>
<HL> Newmont Mining, Banks Are Negotiating Million-Ounce Gold Loan, Sources Say </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jacquie McNish and Gary Lamphier (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> NEM NGC </CO>
<IN> PCS CMD </IN>
<TEXT>
   Newmont Mining Corp. is negotiating with a syndicate of international banks to arrange a million-ounce gold loan, more than twice the size of any existing gold-based loan, bank and investment executives said. 

   In trading late Friday on the London Metal Exchange the spot price of gold was quoted at $477 an ounce, giving Newmont's planned loan an indicated value of $477 million. 
If Newmont obtains the gold loan, banking and gold mining executives say its unprecedented size will enhance the popularity and credibility of this low-cost financing technique that is helping to fuel a boom in North American and Australian gold production. 

   Peter Munk, chairman and chief executive officer of Toronto-based American Barrick Resources Corp., said a million-ounce gold loan "could be a turning point" for the gold mining industry. 
Banks have been cautious about lending large amounts of gold and haven't lent more than 400,000 ounces to any one borrower. 
American Barrick borrowed 264,000 ounces of gold last fall. 

   "It would certainly add a lot of credence to the market," said Anthony Walsh, treasurer and vice president of Toronto-based Royex Gold Mining Corp. 

   T. Peter Philip, senior vice president of New York-based Newmont Mining, declined to comment. 
Banking and investment executives said Bank of Nova Scotia is leading the syndicate and Newmont plans to create a new holding company to borrow the gold. 

   Newmont is expected to use the loan to refinance some of the $2 billion it borrowed last September when it paid a special dividend of $33 a share to thwart a takeover bid from a group led by T. Boone Pickens Jr. Bank executives said the gold loan probably will have a five-year term with an annual interest rate of about 1.5%. 
Newmont would repay the loan with gold produced by its 90%-owned Newmont Gold Co., North America's largest gold producer. 
In trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday, Newmont Mining closed at $34.875, down 25 cents. 

   Gold loans have tended to have terms of less than three years and are used primarily to fund working capital. 
Newmont's planned five-year loan apparently signals banks' willingness to lend gold for long-term uses. 

   Gold loans are gaining popularity because of their low cost and diminishing investor appetite for new gold shares in the wake of the stock market crash. 
"If the stock market isn't available, gold loans are the best alternative," said Ray Jenner, treasurer of Edmonton, Alberta-based Echo Bay Mines Ltd. 

   "There's going to be a lot of new gold mines coming into production and more of the financing will come from gold loans," said Gordon Hawke, a senior manager with Royal Bank of Canada. 

   Typically, when a mining company borrows gold from a bank it agrees to repay the gold in installments to the bank with gold produced at its mines. 
Borrowers can receive cash for a gold loan by selling the borrowed gold. 

   Banks have lent small amounts of gold for decades to borrowers such as jewelers, who use gold in their business. 
But it was only in 1985 that gold mining companies began to borrow significant amounts of gold to help finance their operations. 
Echo Bay Mines says it was the first in North America to use the technique in March 1985 when it borrowed 100,000 ounces. 

   Since then, investment officials estimate the equivalent of about $2 billion has been lent in gold to mining companies. 
Gold loans are an attractive form of debt because annual interest rates of between 1.5% and 3% are significantly lower than those charged on bank loans or bonds. 
Gold loans would be highly risky for nongold producers because gold prices could rise when the loan has to be repaid. 
Mining companies are protected from such risks as long as they can produce gold. 

   Rates are so low on gold loans because financial institutions are lending gold that would otherwise sit in vaults. 
Most commercial banks borrow gold from financial companies that own gold bullion or from central banks that act as agents for their governments' gold reserves. 
The U.S. doesn't lend its gold to commercial banks, but Canada and certain European and Asian countries do through their central banks. 

   Central banks and financial companies usually charge rates of less than 1% on gold loans and restrict their lending to major commercial banks. 
"It's a way of earning a return on gold. 
Otherwise, it just sits in the basement," said a spokesman for Bank of Canada, the country's central bank. 

   Some bankers and investment officials, however, are concerned about the increasing size of gold loans. 
Newmont's planned one-million ounce loan suprised some observers because it exceeds Newmont Gold's projected gold production of 930,000 ounces in 1988. 

   Although the gold can be repaid over several years, some bankers said Newmont Gold will be under much pressure to increase its gold output so that it can repay the debt without reducing its gold sales. 
Newmont Gold recently forecast that its annual gold production will rise to 1.6 million ounces by 1990. 

   "People are losing sight of the risks of gold loans," said one investment banker who declined to be identified. 
"What happens if a company has production problems and it can't produce gold at a time gold prices are rising? 
How will they repay the loan?" he asked. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
