ID: 130	RANK: 6	SCORE: 27.832405
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870303-0024 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

Feisty Pezim Only Wants a Gold Mine
-- And International Corona's Top Job
--
By Leonard Zehr and Alan Bayless
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> T.ICR </IN>
<TEXT>
   Canadian mining promotor Murray Pezim has begun a messy corporate fight to get his gold mine back. 

   Last week, International Corona Resources Ltd. said it would discontinue the positions of vice chairmen, held by the "Pez," as he is called, and Ned Goodman. 
The Toronto gold-mining company said the two could remain as directors. 
In addition, two of Mr. Pezim's nominees to the 10-member board failed to win reelection. 

   Next Monday, the Supreme Court of Ontario will hear Mr. Pezim's request to have five Corona directors removed and replaced with his nominees or with court-appointees. 

   Mr. Pezim, who helped found the company, vowed to press his feud against management, saying the board broke an agreement under which he was to have continued to serve in an "executive position." 

   "Even if we don't win Monday, I'm going to call a special shareholders meeting and vote 51% of the stock for a new board," Mr. Pezim said. 
"My people are buying a lot of (Corona) stock. 
I want to be chairman again." 
Mr. Pezim became vice chairman several years ago when he gave up the post as chairman because of illness. 

   In the early 1980s, Corona was a fledgling mining exploration company that was effectively controlled by Mr. Pezim. 
Under his leadership, the company discovered Canada's richest gold deposit at Hemlo, Ontario. 
Mr. Pezim arranged the initial financing that led to the discovery of the Hemlo ore body. 

   Officials of Corona couldn't be reached for comment on the issue of dropping Mr. Pezim as vice chairman, but in a previous statement, the company said it was "disturbed about statements purportedly made to the media by Mr. Pezim concerning proposed transactions that have not been recommended by Corona's management, nor considered by the Corona board." 

   His fight began six weeks ago when Mr. Pezim asked Peter Steen, Corona's chief executive officer, for 40 Corona annual reports to give to his clients in Europe. 
Mr. Steen refused. 
"Steen told me they don't want me representing the company," Mr. Pezim recalled. 

   A Corona spokeswoman said that Mr. Steen and Theodore Rhenius, Corona's chief financial officer, were in Europe last September speaking to potential investors. 
"Peter felt things might get confused having two groups speaking for the company," she added. 
Mr. Steen couldn't be reached for comment. 

   "I've had indications for the past year that (Corona and its largest single shareholder, Royex Gold Mining Corp.) have wanted to get rid of me," Mr. Pezim said. 
"They totally shafted us at the Corona annual meeting, when they proposed a new board. 
We didn't have the faintest idea that two of my people weren't going to be reappointed." 

   The Corona spokeswoman says Mr. Pezim "started making noises" in January about gaining control of Corona. 
She said Royex, which owns 38% of Corona, supported the new slate of directors "to lessen Mr. Pezim's influence on the board." 
Corona owns about 50% of Royex. 

   One of Canada's most colorful executives, the 66-year-old Mr. Pezim currently promotes a stable of about 40 Vancouver Stock Exchange-listed mining companies. 
Mr. Pezim claims he made and lost a total of more than $150 million (Canadian) from various ventures. 

   He said he lost control of Corona in 1984 after two ill-fated ventures -- Pezzaz greeting cards, which featured audiocassette messages from Hollywood personalities, and Swensen's Ice Cream Co. of Canada. 
"Every time I get involved in something other than gold mining, I get burned," he said. 

   Mr. Goodman, Royex's current chairman, bailed out Corona and Mr. Pezim, who owed his stockbrokers about $4 million in 1984. 
Mr. Pezim estimated his stake to have been about 25%, a portion of which he sold to Mr. Goodman. 

   According to Mr. Pezim, the two had a verbal agreement to retain Mr. Pezim as a senior officer of Corona and a member of the executive committee. 
He also said they agreed that the Goodman and Pezim groups would have equal representation on the Corona board. 

   Now, Mr. Pezim thinks Mr. Goodman is behind the moves to push him out of Corona. 
Mr. Goodman "is my sworn enemy now. 
I'm going to dig up everything I can on him. 
I'm a street fighter. 
I don't quit once I start something." 
Mr. Goodman wasn't available for comment. 

   In addition to owning a 50% interest in one of the three gold mines at Hemlo, Corona won a court decision last year against LAC Minerals Ltd., which also operates a mine at Hemlo. 
The court ordered LAC to hand over its mine, valued by some specialists at more than $1 billion, to Corona. 
An appeals court is expected to rule soon. 

   Mr. Pezim, who launched the suit against LAC, said he wants to have more influence at Corona. 
He also said he disagreed with many of Corona's recent decisions, including a $45 million warrant financing last year. 

   Moreover, he says he wasn't consulted when Royex paid about $52 million earlier this year to acquire effective control of Lacana Mining Corp., a Toronto mining and oil and gas concern. 
While he isn't a director of Royex, he said Royex probably plans to use proceeds to buy more Corona shares to tighten the interlocking ownership among the three companies. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
