ID: 130	RANK: 66	SCORE: 13.791340
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890905-0096 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890905 </DD>
<AN> 890905-0096. </AN>
<HL> World Markets:
@  Vancouver Exchange Finds Gold
@  As Revival Overcomes Skepticism
@  ----
@  By Gary Lamphier
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 09/05/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> EUROP CANDA FREST JAPAN </CO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN>
<DATELINE> VANCOUVER, British Columbia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The beleaguered Vancouver Stock Exchange is showing new signs of life -- for better or worse. 

   Racked by stock scandals and scathing press coverage that helped shrink trading activity, the exchange's seven-year-old index sank to a record low in May. 
But word of a gold discovery in a remote area of British Columbia, involving companies linked to 68-year-old Vancouver promoter Murray Pezim, seems to have brought speculative small investors back to the exchange. 

   The Vancouver exchange specializes in the risky, low-priced "penny stocks" of gold exploration concerns and other startup ventures. 
Like many penny-stock brokerage firms, it has been finding investors harder to entice because of the increased attention on penny-stock scams. 

   Still, daily trading volume has swelled in recent weeks, reaching a record high of 53.5 million shares last Monday, surpassing the high set just the previous Friday. 
The dollar value of trading, though only a fraction of the level on the Toronto Stock Exchange, Canada's largest, is also up substantially, peaking last Monday at 59.4 million Canadian dollars (US$50.4 million). 
That's about five times the average daily value for the year ended March 31, when the exchange reported a loss of C$3.7 million. 

   The reported gold discovery in British Columbia "has just revitalized our whole business," says Chan Buckland, vice president of Canarim Investment Corp., Vancouver's largest brokerage house. 
"It's fair to say most of the brokers' incomes are quadrupling over what they were a couple of months ago." 

   Brokers getting rich is no guarantee that investors will, of course. 
Several well-publicized scams involving certain Vancouver-listed stocks and their promoters have made most investors wary of sampling the exchange's more than 2,500 listed stocks. 

   "There's a healthy dose of skepticism about the authenticity of that market as a whole. 
It's going to take quite a lot to coax the mainstream investor to get back into the Vancouver market," says Robert McEwen, president of Toronto's Goldcorp Investments Ltd., which invests in gold stocks. 

   Adds Robert Flaherty, editor of New York's OTC Review, a monthly magazine that tracks over-the-counter stocks, "Generally, the stuff sells on hype up there. 
I can't see going into that market unless you want to get killed." 
Mr. Flaherty concedes that exchange officials "have been trying to clean up the place" by introducing tighter listing requirements, but he still advises investors to steer clear of Vancouver. 

   The Vancouver exchange is used to criticism and early obituaries. 
Donald Hudson, Vancouver exchange president, only three months ago was fielding questions about whether the exchange could survive; Forbes magazine had just run a stinging article that dubbed the exchange "the scam capital of the world." 
But Mr. Hudson says that provincial securities regulators have stepped up enforcement efforts in an attempt to weed out unethical operators. 

   He adds that the gold discovery in British Columbia, by Vancouver's Calpine Resources Inc. and its partner, Consolidated Stikine Silver Ltd., cements a turnaround that was already under way. 
"There was some evidence that our market had bottomed out," Mr. Hudson says, including an upswing in the daily ratio of advancing to declining stocks and a gradual gain in the exchange's index from its record low of 686.65 on May 30. 
It closed Friday at 844.0. 
"Our market is the retail investor," Mr. Hudson avows. 
"This may be an indication that the retail investor is back." 

   Some brokers and investors say Vancouver-listed stocks are also benefiting from expectations that gold prices will rebound from their currently depressed levels. 
"In view of the strength in leading gold stocks on other exchanges in the past few months, some of this is now percolating into second and third-tier gold stocks, including some of those in Vancouver," says Jeffrey Nichols, president of Toronto's APMA (Canada) Ltd., an investment concern that specializes in precious metals. 

   But brokers and investors agree that the main reason for the Vancouver exchange's improved fortunes stems from the gold discovery in northwestern British Columbia by Consolidated Stikine and Calpine Resources. 
The latter, whose stock price has soared with each new round of drill results, is one of a stable of companies controlled by Vancouver's Prime Resources Corp., which is run by Mr. Pezim and is effectively controlled by Toronto's Corona Corp., a big gold producer. 

   "It's certainly a world-class ore body, maybe bigger than Hemlo," declares the colorful Mr. Pezim, who is known in Canadian investment circles as simply "the Pez." 
He is Vancouver's best-known promoter. 

   Mr. Pezim's many flops include an ill-fated venture that made greeting cards with audio-cassette messages from Hollywood personalities. 
But he has also had a major success. 
In the early 1980s, he helped found Corona's predecessor, and under his leadership, the company found Canada's richest known gold deposit, at Hemlo, Ontario. 
Hemlo is now home to three of Canada's biggest gold mines, two of which are jointly owned by Corona. 

   Vancouver analyst Robert Sibthorpe, of Yorkton Securities Inc., calls the Calpine-Stikine discovery "the best looking thing I've seen in my career as a geologist and analyst," which he says spans about 20 years. 
On the basis of results from about 100 drill holes, he estimates the deposit contains probable reserves "on the order of four million contained ounces" of gold, which would rank it among Canada's largest known gold deposits. 

   Several Toronto analysts who track major gold stocks agree that the find is significant, but note that the deposit's remote location near Alaska's panhandle would make mining difficult and expensive. 

   While small investors have caught Vancouver's newfound gold bug, few institutional players buy Vancouver-listed stocks. 
"We stay with the big blue-chip names, like Placer Dome and American Barrick," says Carol Schultz, associate manager of New York's $120 million Oppenheimer Gold and Special Minerals Fund, one of the year's best-performing gold funds. 
"We've never tried the Vancouver exchange," she says, mainly because its small-capitalization stocks aren't traded actively enough to accommodate orders from big funds. 

   No matter, the exchange is finding business from others. 
It even managed to win back business from the advisers to a Texas gold fund, whose former portfolio manager was found by a Canadian court to have accepted bribes f rom promoters to buy worthless stock on the Vancouver exchange. 
The scam cost the Prospector Fund, which is run by United Services Advisors Inc., of San Antonio, Texas, about $16 million. 

   "One bad apple doesn't ruin the whole batch," says Gil Atzmon, portfolio manager of the affiliated New Prospector Fund. 
The fund, which has trailed many other gold funds this year, currently holds several Vancouver-listed stocks, including Calpine Resources, among its $92 million of equities. 
"The nature of the (Vancouver) market is that it's a venture capital market," he says, "and it has its place." 

   ---

   Monday's Market Activity 

   Tokyo stocks rebounded for the first time in four trading days. 
Traders and fund managers remained cool toward the market, however, pointing to poor turnover, which implies that gains weren't strongly supported. 

   In London, takeover speculation, mainly about a handful of U.K. food and pharmaceutical concerns, helped boost the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index in thin trading. 

   Japan's Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 135.56 points to 34483.78. 
The index lost 82.98 points Friday. 

   In trading in Tokyo Tuesday, the Nikkei index was up 144.93 points at 34628.71 just after the opening. 

   Volume on the First Section Monday was estimated at 400 million shares, down from 645 million shares Friday. 

   Advancing issues outnumbered declining issues 583-363, with 164 issues remaining unchanged. 

   While the FT-SE 100 got a boost in early trading, continued speculation about potential takeovers was cited as the primary factor in the market's continued rise above the 2400 level. 

   "The market is still afraid of selling," a dealer with a large European institution said, "as long as this takeover talk remains active." 

   The FT-SE 100 closed at 2419.2, up 11.7 points, but off its intraday high of 2424.5. 
Volume on the London market also wassubstantially below Friday's level. 
Only 369.9 million shares were traded yesterday, compared with 533 million Friday. 

   In other European markets, stock prices were higher in London, Paris, Frankfurt, Zurich and Brussels and lower in Amsterdam, Stockholm and Milan. 
South African gold stocks closed lower. 

   Stock prices closed higher in Wellington, Singapore, Hong Kong and Sydney and were lower in Seoul, Manila and Taipei. 

   Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva. 
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100. 
The percentage change is since year-end. 
@ % This 
@ Sep 1 Aug 31 Year 
@ U.S. ................... 325.3 322.9 + 27.0 
@ Britain ................ 721.5 716.1 + 32.1 
@ Canada ................. 438.0 437.1 + 19.3 
@ Japan .................. 1530.0 1530.9 + 7.7 
@ France ................. 543.5 542.1 + 22.8 
@ Germany ................ 254.6 251.9 + 22.4 
@ Hong Kong .............. 1864.8 1863.6 - 8.1 
@ Switzerland ............ 235.2 235.1 + 36.0 
@ Australia .............. 349.0 352.1 + 20.2 
@ World index ............ 534.9 535.2 + 8.2 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
