ID: 204	RANK: 72	SCORE: 9.490403
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870722-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> Entrepreneurs vs. the Textbooks
---
By Burt Folsom</HL>
<DD> 07/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Late last century, America's rise to power in the world was often a story of masterly entrepreneurship. 
Led by Andrew Carnegie in steel and John D. Rockefeller in oil, the U.S. became the industrial showcase of the world. 

   How did Carnegie and Rockefeller do so well? 
They cut costs, innovated, vertically integrated, and gave bonuses on the basis of merit. 
Competitors who did not do these things fell by the wayside, but consumers and job-seekers benefited from low prices and American dominance. 

   The 1980s are also an age of entrepreneurship, but we don't turn for wisdom to the entrepreneurs of yesteryear. 
One reason is that historians often tell us not to. 
The message still sent forth from the leading college textbooks in American history is that our early industrialists were robber barons, whose unsavory escapades had to be regulated by the federal government for the good of the consumer. 

   In "The National Experience," C. Vann Woodward of Yale admires Carnegie's efficiency but says, "His trail to the top was strewn with ruined competitors, crushed partners, and broken labor movements." 
The fact is that these strewn bodies were often those of Englishmen and Americans who wanted to charge higher prices for their steel and their labor. 
Their story is sad, but it might have been sadder for the U.S. had Carnegie not come along and cut the price of making steel from $56 to $11.50 a ton. 
Thanks to Carnegie the U.S., not England or Germany, led the world in steel production. 

   Rockefeller fares even worse in the textbooks. 
Oddly, Mr. Woodward condemns Rockefeller for "price-slashing." 
In "The American Nation," John Garraty of Columbia University says Rockefeller was ruthless to his inefficient competitors. 
The same story is told by the late Thomas Bailey of Stanford, whose "The American Pageant" has sold more than two million copies. 
Mr. Bailey says that Rockefeller "pursued a policy of rule or ruin," and did so because he believed that "a kind of primitive savagery prevailed in the jungle world of big business." 

   These authors completely ignore the key economic event in Rockefeller's career: his epic battle against the Russians in the 1880s for the world oil trade. 
The Russians, in their plentiful oil fields at Baku, had a richer, more viscous oil that yielded 280 barrels per well per day, compared with 4.5 barrels per day from American wells. 
Also, Russia was closer to European countries, many of which slapped high tariffs on U.S. oil. 
Yet Rockefeller's Standard Oil ran such an innovative, efficient operation -- from the making of barrels to the deploying of ocean tankersthat it could sell oil for an incredible seven cents a gallon ("price-slashing" to Mr. Woodward) and thereby outmaneuver the Russians for most of the world oil trade. 

   The biases that occur in the text of these college textbooks should be obvious, but more subtle ones can be found in the pictures selected and the captions adopted. 
For example, cartoons of fat industrialists bilking the public are common. 
Mr. Bailey includes a cartoon of Rockefeller holding the White House in his hand. 
Mr. Woodward chooses a picture of banker J.P. Morgan with what appears to be a knife in his left hand. 
The caption reads: "J. 
Pierpont Morgan: a passion for order." 
Mr. Bailey includes a photograph of Morgan waving an umbrella, but it looks like a sword. 

   Grover Cleveland, who was friendly with many of the entrepreneurs, receives a photograph with the caption "stubborn conservative" in the Woodward textbook. 
By contrast, Jane Addams, a social reformer, receives a photograph and this caption: "Jane Addams with her aides: she cared for the poor." 

   After showing how entrepreneurs often "corrupted" the rise of big business, textbook authors reveal their solution: government intervention. 
Often cited as needing federal aid are the transcontinental railroads. 
"Some system of subsidy was essential," states John Garraty. 
Not true. 
In fact, the four transcontinentals that were so subsidized all went bankrupt. 
The one transcontinental built with no federal aid -- James J. Hill's Great Northern -- never went bankrupt. 
It was the best-built, best-paying line of the lot. 

   Government regulation, the textbooks tell us, also was needed. 
According to Mr. Bailey, "a revolutionary new principle was written into the law books by the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, as well as by the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887. 
Private greed must henceforth be subordinated to public need." 

   Hill, again, is our antidote. 
He built two steamships and merged three railroads to make one large, efficient system to enter world trade. 
It worked. 
Hill beat England and Belgium and captured Oriental markets in railroads, cotton and food. 
Then the Interstate Commerce Commission told him he couldn't give special discounts; the Supreme Court told him he couldn't merge the three railroads. 
Bigness, the trustbusters said (and the textbooks concurred), was badness. 
Ever since Hill, the Sherman Act has left corporate debris and sad consumers all over the American landscape. 
AT&amp;T is the most recent casualty of an antitrust law so vague that it can literally be interpreted to bar almost all acts of trade. 

   As the role of government increased in our society this century, we gradually neglected the lessons taught by past entrepreneurs. 
Those countries that cut costs, innovated and rewarded achievers began to surpass us. 
As these countries copied Rockefeller, now we are trying to copy them -- unaware that we are often imitating our own entrepreneurs of 100 years ago. 

   History teaches us much that we should know. 
It's too bad the history textbooks don't do more of the same. 

   ---
   Mr. Folsom is an associate professor of history at Murray State University, Murray, Ky., and the author of "Entrepreneurs vs. the State," which will be published this fall by the Young America's Foundation. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
