ID: 204	RANK: 97	SCORE: 8.835655
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870617-0064 </DOCNO>
<HL> Ex-Treasury Chief Is Untouchable No Longer
---
By Bernard D.                                                  </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<IN> TAXES
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The fall from grace of Robert Bernard Anderson, a pious Texan who Dwight Eisenhower thought should be president, is a footnote to free-market economics, political history and the nature of expose journalism. 

   Mr. Anderson, who is scheduled to be sentenced June 25, has pleaded guilty to bank fraud and tax evasion, surprising those unacquainted with his remarkable history. 
His reputation for probity was largely unassailable. 
On his second day in the White House, Lyndon Johnson was visited by Eisenhower, who urged the new president to do nothing without talking to Mr. Anderson, by then a high-powered consultant. 

   Eisenhower did much more than that for the Texas lawyer who had served him as Navy secretary and deputy secretary of defense. 
In 1956, Eisenhower tried to push Vice President Richard Nixon aside to a cabinet post. 
Eisenhower thought of replacing Mr. Nixon with Mr. Anderson on the 1956 ticket. 
Republican political leaders, notably National Chairman Leonard Hall, killed that idea, warning that the move would split the party. 

   Mr. Anderson himself posed a problem for Eisenhower's plans. 
According to one party involved in the haggling, Mr. Anderson said he needed $1 million to return to government. 
Eisenhower's good friend, Sid W. Richardson, arranged that. 
Richardson was one of the two great multimillionaire Texas wildcatters of the era and he had plenty of undrilled tracts. 
So, through an elaborate series of masking intermediaries, Richardson gave Mr. Anderson an interest in some of his Texas property that could indeed yield $1 million. 
As it happened, a Nelson Rockefeller company, now defunct, ultimately bought out Mr. Anderson's interest and "lost" money on the deal. 

   Richardson, of course, was no fool. 
He had linked a portion of Mr. Anderson's take to the price of domestic oil. 
The Texas wildcatter and other domestic drillers complained, then as now, that they weren't getting enough, that cheap foreign oil was unbearable competition. 
National security demanded that the flow of imports be reduced. 
Mr. Anderson would soon be in a position to help Richardson, the Rockefellers and himself. 

   Mr. Anderson returned to Ike's cabinet in 1957, this time as Treasury secretary. 
He was the key member of a cabinet committee that successfully urged Eisenhower to impose quotas against imported oil. 
This had the intended result. 
By 1969, the Senate antitrust subcommittee estimated that the quotas were costing consumers $7.2 billion a year. 
A presidential task force put the figure at $4.85 billion. 

   This was expensive, even for national security. 
Moreover, it was unclear then, as it is unclear now, why artificial stimuli to produce domestic oil offer more security than leaving the oil in the ground and using cheaper foreign crude instead. 
Finally, one of the descendants of the original Rockefeller companies, Standard Oil of Indiana (now Amoco), had received a windfall of $190 million from the quota technique devised by Mr. Anderson and his colleagues. 
They had distributed quotas to all firms, regardless of whether they had ever imported oil, and allowed a brisk trade in the government-created licenses. 

   Mr. Anderson's wheeling and dealing went unnoticed at the time, but came to light in 1970. 
The Washington Post, with the help of antitrust subcommittee staff members and a populist Texas lawyer, told the story in detail. 
I had spent three months reporting and writing the tale. 
The account was prominently displayed on page one. 
But it was a one-day sensation, largely confined to the Post's circulation area. 
Almost nobody noticed and a shrewd lobbyist for Exxon taunted me, "What was that all about?" 

   Apart from wire-service summaries, no one followed up on the story. 
On Capitol Hill, nobody wanted to investigate. 
The logical choice, Sen. Phil Hart (D., Mich.), chairman of the antitrust subcommittee, had been assured by Mr. Anderson's friends that he was clean. 
Sen. Hart, decent if naive, was persuaded. 

   The prevailing view held that Mr. Anderson, blessed several times by Eisenhower, was surely a good man who could explain these peculiar and complicated arrangements over oil. 
The fact that Mr. Anderson in the Post relied heavily on a faulty memory did not shake the faith. 
It was a useful journalistic lesson. 
You cannot expose anyone who is not ripe for exposure. 
Editors, as Eisenhower had, classified Mr. Anderson among the untouchables. 
After all, he displayed an 8-inch-by-11-inch picture of Jesus in his One Rockefeller Plaza office, alongside the framed, signed testimonials of presidents. 
At that time, Mr. Anderson was unexposable. 

   If Eisenhower had succeeded, if he had moved Mr. Nixon aside for Mr. Anderson in 1956, could the treasury chief have been elected president in 1960? 
Probably not. 
In early 1960, when Arthur Burns warned that the recession would hit bottom near Election Day and urged easier credit and a speedup in defense orders, Eisenhower's cabinet said no. 
Mr. Anderson was the central figure in domestic affairs; he probably would have vetoed any stimulus even if he had been the candidate. 
As it happened, Mr. Burns was right. 
The recession played a major role in electing John F. Kennedy. 

   ---
   Mr. Nossiter, formerly a reporter for the New York Times and the Washington Post, has just published "The Global Struggle for More" (Harper &amp; Row). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
