ID: 113	RANK: 94	SCORE: 11.879375
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880601-0069 </DOCNO>
<HL> A Big Shopping Mall Is Setting Its Sights On a Civil War Site --- Staging Area for the Battles Of Bull Run Is Overrun With Builders' Bulldozers </HL>
<AUTHOR> Barbara Rosewicz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> REL CON </IN>
<DATELINE> MANASSAS, Va.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "Charge!" could take on a whole new meaning at this Civil War battle site. 

   Pasture land where Robert E. Lee sent his musket-bearing troops to their greatest victory against the North 126 years ago may soon be overrun by invaders wielding MasterCards. 
Developers, you see, plan to build a shopping mall on this hallowed ground. 

   The thought of five big department stores and dozens of specialty shops plunked down on land where boys in blue and gray spilled their blood has sparked a new Battle of Manassas. 
"This is plainly a battle between greed and heritage," says Anne Snyder, a red-haired, 66-year-old former Marine known locally as "Stonewall Annie." 
She has marshaled a group of rebels who include historians, congressmen, Carter administration luminaries (Jody Powell and Zbigniew Brzezinski), and Charlton Heston. 
Their battle cry: "Stonewall the Mall." 

   But even as the issue of slavery split the Union in 1861, shopping malls are divisive in these parts. 
Prince William County officials welcome the mall as a contribution to the tax base. 
The developers say that what they do on private land won't violate the neighboring Manassas National Battlefield Park. 
And supporters say that sacred ground is in the eye of the consumer: "All in all, I prefer shopping malls," explained Virginian William Heyman in a letter to the Washington Post. 
"Battlefields glorify death. 
Shopping malls celebrate life." 

   The mall-fighters have already won one skirmish. 
To make way for the 1.2 million-square-foot mall, developers had planned to level Stuart's Hill, where Gen. Lee set up his headquarters in 1862 for the second Battle of Manassas. 

   A National Park Service official likens that to putting "a roller derby around the Sistine Chapel." 
In the 1861 and 1862 Civil War battles fought at Manassas -- and known in the North as the Battles of Bull Run -- the underdog South sent the Union fleeing back toward Washington, 26 miles away. 

   Now the mall developers have retreated somewhat themselves, offering to move their planned colossus to lower ground so as to make it less visible from the national park. 
They would still pave over much of the ridge for office buildings and parking spaces, but they would leave a few acres intact to commemorate Gen. Lee's 30 hours on the summit. 
The mall, along with associated new homes and town houses, would then be spread in the historical staging area where half of Lee's army waited for battle, took care of the wounded at two field hospitals and planted their dead in temporary graves. 
About 155 men are said to have died in skirmishes on the tract. 

   Like Gen. Lee, Mrs. Snyder and her citizen volunteers are in danger of winning a battle but losing the war. 
Hazel/Peterson Cos., the developer, owns the 540 acres of private land next to the national park and has already won zoning approval to build the mall. 
The developers include a powerful Yankee, Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. of Ohio, the nation's biggest builder of shopping centers. 

   The developers defend their right to make use of the land they own. 
In any event, "Its historical importance is debatable," says Robert Kelly, Hazel/Peterson's spokesman. 
Most of the local Civil War fighting, he says, took place on land well within the national park, and the federal government had turned down chances to buy the tract where the mall is to be. 
"This is one of the hottest real-estate markets in the country," he says, "and now there are higher and better uses for the land." 

   Preservationists say Manassas is just one of many national-park sites endangered by encroaching development. 
They worry about the Florida Everglades, whose delicate water system is threatened by the growth of Dade County. 
They fret because in the vicinity of Yellowstone National Park, in Montana a religious sect called the Church Universal and Triumphant has set up trailers and fences in a private valley and wants to tap into the geothermal energy that feeds Yellowstone's geysers. 
And someday, in the isolated Montana park at Little Big Horn, some ice-cream vendor might not be able to resist the temptation to build his own Custard's Last Stand on a 2.5-mile, privately owned strip that cuts across federal parkland there. 

   But historic preservationists' blood seems to run hottest over Civil War sites. 
And they are taking a definite stand in Manassas, where Confederate Gen. Thomas J. Jackson became known as "Stonewall" at the first Battle of Manassas. 

   "Once it's gone, it will never be back again," says Mr. Powell, the former White House press secretary, speaking of the historic, albeit private, property: "It's easy to bulldoze the trees and push down the hill, but you can be damned sure you're never going to bulldoze the office building and dig up the parking lots." 
Mr. Powell, a Georgian, counts nine ancestors who fought at Manassas. 

   The anti-mall forces threw a dinner dance to raise money, and they plan an apple-pie bake sale to help pay a lawyer to challenge in court the constuction project's zoning. 
A local songwriter donated a battle hymn of his own composition in which he imagines seeing his mythical grandfather fall where they now want to build the mall. 

   Mr. Powell, who heads the Washington office of ad agency Ogilvy &amp; Mather, has donated public-relations services. 
A coalition of national perservation groups has rallied to the cause. 
Democratic Reps. 
Robert Mrazek of New York and Michael Andrews of Texas have proposed bills in the House to block the mall and buy the land for the 3,800-acre park. 
Republican Rep. Frank Wolf of Virginia has proposed to have the government acquire the land immediately. 

   If the developers hadn't suddenly changed their plans in January, the current battle might never have occurred. 
The National Park Service and historic preservationists had reluctantly acquiesced in a zoning change to allow a campus-like office -- housing development on the rural tract. 
Then, however, the developers announced that they were taking on DeBartolo Corp. as a partner, and planned to construct one of the largest shopping malls in the Washington, D.C., area. 

   The Interior Department, which oversees the park service, has since tried to be a peacemaker in the Manassas fray, proposing to allow the mall while at the same time closing two busy roads that bisect the park. 
But the preservationists weren't mollified. 

   "It's not just the traffic problem that a mall would bring," complains Elizabeth Connelly, a 33-year-old mother of four who is one of Mrs. Snyder's volunteers. 
"It's everything else that comes with the mall, like fast-food restaurants and gas stations." 

   While all the talking is going on, developers' bulldozers already are clearing land for a road and new housing. 
Some preservationists worry that suburbanization here may also be unstoppable. 
The road from Manassas to the nation's capital these days is an interstate highway. 
And Gen. Lee never had to cross swords with a zoning lawyer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
