ID: 107	RANK: 20	SCORE: 8.833868
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880627-0142 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Watching the Warbirds Fly </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joe Morgenstern </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Chino, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As in a dream, a P-51 Mustang fighter from World War II materialized out of the bright blue sky, thundered past the crowds at the edge of the airport runway, swept up into a steep, banking turn and disappeared into dazzlements of sunlight. 
Then, as if a Mustang weren't enough, a Japanese Zero -- a real Zero, for Pete's sake! -- swooped down from nowhere into a slow roll, displaying the vivid red suns on its khaki wings. 

   Whose dream, you ask? 
Why, my dream, for one, the martial fantasy of a child of the 1940s. 
But I'm hardly alone in my delight with such fly-by-day entertainments as the one staged here recently at a hot, dusty airport that started life as a training field in World War II. 
At airports across the country, crowds of all ages are turning out to ogle airplanes old and new. 
Another air-show season is upon us. 

   No one knows how many people go to air shows, though attendance must be up there in the millions. 
It's tricky enough to keep track of the events. 
One source, an aviation monthly in California called the Pacific Flyer, lists 61 shows, fairs, expos and "warbird extravaganzas" in the U.S. and Canada before the end of September. 
Some of the big ones star the Air Force's Thunderbirds or the Navy's Blue Angels, stunt teams that propagandize heart-stoppingly, if indirectly, on behalf of military aviation. 
Many shows feature fly-bys of World War II aircraft that have been restored by private owners, or by outfits such as Chino's Planes of Fame Museum. 
A few shows end in tragedy or near-tragedy. 
Last month at El Toro, Calif., a Marine Corps pilot was severely injured when his Hornet fighter crashed during a demonstration loop. 

   The closest call at Chino, less than an hour's drive east of Los Angeles, came when a gust of wind blew a big red umbrella off a Superpretzel stand, and the umbrella dealt a glancing blow to a spectator's camcorder. 
There was no lack of thrills for me, though. 
This was my first warbird extravaganza, and I was a pushover from the start. 

   Like other little boys during World War II, I'd drawn furtive pictures of fighters and bombers at my grammar school desk. 
In 1944, at the age of 12, I had even written a poem -- a love poem, I'm afraid you'd have to call it -- in praise of the P-51 Mustang. 
"This ship has the lines of a powerful steed," it began, "and she's got the speed of a shot." 
I remember sending it to the Mustang's builders, North American Aircraft, and receiving an 8x10 glossy of my inamorata in flight. 

   Now I was watching a Mustang, as well as the last flyable Zero in the world, or so they said, and also startling myself, at every turn, with nuggets of knowledge I hadn't known I still possessed. 

   What, for example, was that twin-engine relic parked next to a hangar over there? 
A Lockheed Lodestar, of course, its silhouette straight out of my old aircraft spotter's guide. 
The little low-winged trainer? 
A Navy SJN-5; I studied my reflection in the gorgeously re-chromed spinner of its Hamilton Standard propeller. 
The lumbering bomber with four engines and twin tails? 
I knew it for a B-24 Liberator before the announcer uttered a word. 
And when he asked the audience, "What did the Navy version of the B-24 look like?" 
I could have hollered, as someone else did: "Single tail!" 

   It's easy to see why air shows are so popular. 
First off, they cross the carnival with the shopping mall. 
At one booth inside a hangar at Chino you could buy video highlights of the 1986 Reno Air Races, a videocassette called "Flying the P-47 Thunderbolt," or one called "The Memphis Belle," which happens to be a fine World War II documentary, directed by William Wyler, about a B-17 Flying Fortress. 
Another booth sold toy gliders made of styrofoam -- no more balsa, alas for the ozone layer -- that looped the loop. 

   For sheer action, air shows even beat movies in 70 mm color and six-track Dolby. 
Until last weekend I'd never seen anything like the stunts flown by a pilot named Frank Sanders in a British-built Hawker Sea Fury, which seems to be mostly engine and burns 300 gallons of gasoline an hour. 
As he dove, inverted, toward the unflinching ground, he announced, over a radio patched into the P.A. system: "You'll hear me groan a little bit as we pull a few G's here." 
We groaned on cue as he rolled over, stood the airplane on its tail and hurtled straight up to a stall at 6,000 feet, white smoke trailing from smoke generators at his wingtips. 

   Then there's the obvious lure for war buffs and war lovers. 
During a momentary lull in the dive-bomber fly-by, the announcer interviewed a World War II ace named Mike Russo. 
"One day," Mr. Russo recalled, "I caught a regiment marching down the street, strafed them and killed 376 Germans . . ." I lost the rest of his sentence in engine noise. 

   But you don't have to love war to love warplanes. 
These killing machines from World War II are also objects of grace, distinctive design and raw power. 
They fly through the air the old way -- they churn it, with huge propellers. 
One favorite at Chino was a Boeing Flying Fortress called "Sentimental Journey," which had been flown in for the show from Arizona by members of the Confederate Air Force, the private group that restores and flies old combat planes. 
Metal fatigue may be blighting newer Boeings these days, but it's not a threat that leaped to mind as one admired this B-17G, gleaming as brightly as if it had just been built. 

   "This is an airplane for pure flying," said the smiling pilot, Carl Schmieder, who is much too young to have fought in World War II, and who owns a small chain of jewelry stores in Arizona. 
He told me that the four-engined bomber was built by Douglas, actually, under license from Boeing, at the very end of the war. 
Although it never saw combat, the Fortress flew photo mapping missions in Europe. 

   As we talked in the shade of the bomber's wing, people lined up to look inside for $3 a pop. 
One of them was a retired pharmacist from South Laguna named Frank Keneley. 
He said he'd been a navigator on B-17s during the war, until he was shot down by a Messerschmitt over Germany and interned in a prison camp in Upper Silesia. 
When I expressed my wonderment at how this airplane had been restored, Mr. Keneley agreed, up to a point. 
"It's still not the same for me," he said. 
"All our planes were brand new, and all the wiring was brand new, with that nice new smell you can never get back." 

   ---
   Mr. Morgenstern is a free-lance writer in Los Angeles. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
