ID: 107	RANK: 51	SCORE: 7.784853
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881111-0013 </DOCNO>
<HL> Stealth Fighter Does Exist, the Pentagon Acknowledges, as It Releases Hazy Photo </HL>
<AUTHOR> Tim Carrington and Roy J. Harris Jr. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LK NOC </CO>
<IN> ARO </IN>
<G> DEF </G>
<TEXT>
   The Air Force provided the first public glimpse of its Stealth jet fighter, ending years of official secrecy during which government officials were prohibited from even acknowledging the sophisticated war plane's existence. 

   The Pentagon decision to release a hazy photograph and a few details of the plane followed years in which its existence became widely known. 
The Stealth fighter, built by Lockheed Corp., has been flying since 1983 out of Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada, the Air Force said. 

   The Air Force has had difficulty keeping the project under wraps in part because there have been three Stealth fighter crashes, spurring news reports and increased speculation about the secret project. 
Model-airplane producers began marketing their versions of the aircraft, and novelist Tom Clancy mentioned it in his best sellers. 

   One expert on Stealth technology, though, said the picture of the Lockheed fighter shatters some popularly held notions about the plane. 
"It's an odd-looking plane" that "looks more like a flying wing" than most Stealth buffs had expected, said Bill Sweetman, a St. Paul, Minn., writer whose second book on Stealth aircraft is due out soon. 

   The Air Force decided to end the official secrecy because the plane is about to become fully operational. 
That means it may travel to bases around the world. 
The plane, known as the F-117A, also will be flown more during the daylight hours. 

   The partial unveiling of the Stealth fighter will be followed by an official rollout of another closely guarded secret aircraft, Northrop Corp.'s Stealth bomber. 
This aircraft will be shown to the public for the first time Nov. 22. 

   The Air Force said it bought 52 Stealth fighters, and has ordered seven more. 
The single-seat, dual-engine planes have sweptback wings. 
They have been assigned to the 4450th Tactical Group in Nevada. 

   The Stealth label refers to the new planes' capacity to "be invisible" to enemy radar. 
The Air Force didn't say how much the fighter cost or discuss its speed or range. 

   This is the third time that a secret product of the company's famous Burbank, Calif., "Skunk Works" unit -- officially called the Advanced Development Projects section of Lockheed -- has been unveiled by the government after years of classified operations in the field. 

   In the 1964 election year, President Lyndon Johnson disclosed an interceptor and reconnaissance jet called the SR-71 Blackbird. 
The unveiling of that sleek, black titanium-skinned aircraft came well after that plane was operational. 
The number of SR-71s produced in the 1960s hasn't ever been disclosed, nor has its top speed and altitude. 
But the plane, still in the U.S. arsenal as the nation's main high-speed reconnaisance jet, is believed to be the world's fastest, highest-flying plane. 

   In May 1960, the world learned of another secret Skunk Works aircraft when the Soviet Union announced shooting one down over central Russia and capturing its pilot, Francis Gary Powers. 
That plane, the slow-flying, glider-like U-2, had routinely overflown the U.S.S.R. on reconnaisance missions starting in the mid-1950s. 

   The name Skunk Works, after the foul-smelling Dogpatch factory in the "Li'l Abner" comic strip, has remained popular because of the plant's ability to shun visitors and attention to its programs. 
Its first product was the P-80, the nation's first production jet fighter, created in 143 days late in World War II by a team led by famed aircraft designer Clarence L. (Kelly) Johnson to counter a jet fighter Germany was developing. 

   Unlike the U-2 and SR-71, the Stealth fighter has been discussed for years prior to any official announcement of its existence. 
Always thought to be a Lockheed plane, some aircraft aficionados assumed incorrectly it was designated as the F-19. 

   Before being confirmed yesterday, it had also been rumored that the Stealth fighters were sequestered at Nevada's Nellis Air Force Base. 
That base, though, had been mum on the existence of such planes. 
When an Air Force plane operating out of Nellis crashed near Bakersfield, Calif., in July 1986, and the type of plane was withheld, Nellis officials declined to discuss the unit to which the pilot was assigned, the 4450th Tactical Group. 

   Yesterday, however, the Air Force confirmed that the aircraft in that fatal crash had been an F-117A that was operated by the 4450th Tactical Group. 

   Mr. Sweetman, the Stealth author, said the Air Force picture also makes it clear that the F-117A doesn't have the maneuverability or acceleration of other modern fighters. 
If a Stealth fighter pilot "got into visual range where an enemy pilot saw him, he'd be toast," he said. 
Rather, he added, the plane appears designed to penetrate defenses and eliminate forward targets such as ground-to-air missiles sites and radar installations. 

   But Mr. Sweetman said a pilot familiar with F-117A operations, discussing the plane's performance, recently told him that "it flew better than it looks." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
