ID: 107	RANK: 57	SCORE: 7.684034
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880318-0181 </DOCNO>
<HL> Travel (A Special Report): On Business --- Fear of Flying: The Afflicted Shudder at the Thought of Airplanes, So Some Airlines Offer Classes as a Cure </HL>
<AUTHOR> Cynthia Crossen </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> AIR </IN>
<TEXT>
   THE DC-10 ROSE from a runway at Chicago's O'Hare Airport, slowly rolled over onto its back and hit the ground, killing everyone aboard. 

   The Air Florida pilots cursed for posterity on the cockpit recorder, decided to take off even though they knew the wings of the plane were dangerously icy, and plowed their plane into a bridge. 

   A Japanese jet took so long to crash that one passenger had time to write a letter to his family, describing in horrible detail how it felt to face certain death. 

   Grim tales like these are soon forgotten by most people. 
But for people who hate to fly, crash stories are like baseball cards, with details to be memorized, recalled and traded. 
With a battery of statistics proving that flying is safer than taking a bath, crashes are the only thing that make fear of flying seem rational. 

   An estimated 25 million Americans have some aversion to flying. 
Although most fearful fliers fly -- often with the help of various tranquilizing substances -- they're easy to spot. 
They're taking a last nip in the airport bar before takeoff. 
In the air, when the plane banks right, they lean left to keep the 400-ton jumbo jet from flipping over. 
When they see a plane out the window, they order the flight attendant to inform the pilot. 
They study the faces of the flight attendants and other passengers for traces of anxiety. 
And many simply refuse to use the tiny bathrooms for fear of being locked in during an emergency. 

   People who aren't afraid to fly usually have little tolerance for those of us who are. 
When they ask how, why and when it started, there's often an undertone of "Snap out of it!" 
If fearful fliers like myself could conquer our terror by wanting to, it would have vanished years ago. 
But for many fearful fliers, what began as a vague doubt about the safety of a mammoth, gravity-defying contraption gradually escalated into an uncontrollable panic. 
Flying grips at some primal fears, in my case the terror of knowing with absolute certainty for a few seconds, or perhaps even a few minutes, that you're going to die. 

   Although most fearful fliers go their whole lives in semi-constant fright about flying, a few finally decide to get help. 
On a recent evening, 28 of them gathered at Washington's National Airport for a class, sponsored by USAir, to cure their phobia. 
For some of them, it would be a watershed night: their first time aboard an airplane. 

   A few other airlines offer occasional classes to relieve fear of flying, but none offers as systematic a cure as USAir's. 
During the eight-week course, students learn, in a rudimentary way, how a plane works. 
They're also taught behavior modification techniques and relaxation exercises. 
And they're gradually "desensitized" to airplanes, by spending succeeding sessions first in a plane on the ground with the door open, then on the ground with the door closed, then taxiing around and aborting two takeoffs, and finally in the air in a one-hour graduation flight. 

   Carol Stauffer, a social worker, and Frank Petee, a pilot with more than 50 years of flying experience, teach the class. 
Neither has ever been afraid to fly. 
Mr. Petee, who has been flying since the age of 13, has spent more than 20,000 hours in the air; even when he lost an engine over the ocean, he wasn't worried. 

   In the 13 years the class has been held, Ms. Stauffer and Mr. Petee have seen some severe cases of flying phobia. 
They've seen people who couldn't even stand to drive to the airport. 
They've seen people who couldn't bear to look up in the sky and see a plane. 
Even so, they claim a 97% success rate. 

   Although each case of flying phobia is different, a common thread runs through them: The sounds and movements of a plane seem infinitely louder and larger to a phobic passenger than to an ordinary one. 
For example, one woman from a previous class said she hadn't flown for many years because the last time she was on a plane, it crashed. 
Gradually, Mr. Petee pieced together the real story. 
"One of the clues that it wasn't really a crash was that she said everyone else slept through it," he says. 
In fact, one of the plane's tires blew out on landing. 

   Until the recent USAir class in Washington, Ann Abene, a saleswoman at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., had never seen the inside of an airplane. 
"When I was a little girl, my father used to take me to the airport to watch planes take off," Mrs. Abene says. 
"But my mom was afraid, and that may have rubbed off." 

   Mrs. Abene, whose own daughter is a flight attendant, wasn't too impressed with the Boeing 737 she and her classmates boarded that night. 
"I pictured the inside of a plane like a living room, with a wide aisle," she said. 
"This was like getting on a bus, but a bus is on the ground. 
It made me a little queasy." 

   The teachers told the students that no one who has ever taken the class has failed to go up in the plane for the graduation flight. 
"I thought, 'Oh, Lord, don't let me be the first,'" said Mrs. Abene. 
"I want to do it, I think I'm going to. 
In fact, I'm pretty sure I'm going to." 
Last Saturday, Mrs. Abene did it. 
"I was on cloud nine," she said. 

   Terrence McElhaney, a translator for a branch of the United Nations, flew thousands of miles before he developed his fear of flying. 
It began in early 1987, after there had been a string of crashes. 
He began to get physically ill three or four days before every flight, losing sleep and his appetite. 
Mr. McElhaney, who is 28, says his fear of flying is all part of the "pre-30 syndrome -- I'm too young to die." 

   To Mr. McElhaney, the worst crashes are those that are never explained. 
He would rather hear that the pilot had forgotten to set his wing flaps correctly than hear that a plane had disappeared over the ocean for no apparent reason. 
"There's a comfort in knowing the explanation," he says. 

   Mr. McElhaney used to think that only people who were forced to fly feared it, but he flies mainly because he likes to travel. 
Of course, many people do have to fly for their work, but fearful fliers have found some ingenious ways to avoid it. 
Mr. Petee said one man was so afraid his boss was going to ask him to fly that he started his own business. 
Another man, Ms. Stauffer recalls, said, "How many times can you say your grandmother died and you're not going on that business trip?" 

   People who hate to fly often are overachieving perfectionists who always want to be in control, says Ms. Stauffer. 
"The first night I say to the class how many of you would rather drive the car and how many would rather be the passenger?" she says. 
"They all, including me, want to be the driver. 
We're all control people." 

   Claustrophobia is also rampant among fearful fliers. 
"One woman in Pittsburgh told me she'd fly anywhere in the world if they just left the plane door open," says Ms. Stauffer. 
To a lesser degree, she says, fear of flying is caused by fear of heights and fear of crashing. 
But the ultimate fear is far subtler than these common, and frequently curable, phobias. 
"You're afraid you're going to get up there and if the symptoms get bad enough, you're going to get out of control," says Ms. Stauffer. 
"And make a fool of yourself." 

   ---
   Ms. Crossen is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
