ID: 219	RANK: 31	SCORE: 11.645241
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871222-0152 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Bud Clark: His Is the Tavern -- and the Town
---
By Susan G. Hauser</HL>
<DD> 12/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Portland, Ore.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A local tavern, the Goose Hollow Inn, celebrated its 20th anniversary this fall with week-long festivities. 
Hundreds of Portlanders attended the parties, and scores more drove or flew in from out of town. 
Even the mayor was there. 
Well, why not, since he owns the place. 

   The Goose Hollow Inn is no ordinary tavern. 
It has been written up in travel articles and guidebooks, even noted as a "must see" in a British student travel guide. 
There is nothing particularly interesting about the structure, a rather dilapidated building west of the city center, but the tavern's motto, "Dedicated to extremes of opinion," and the slogan on its matchbook covers, "If violence is your nature, either develop your verbal abilities or leave," has for 20 years attracted an interesting mix of loquacious drinkers. 

   Granted, the Goose Hollow Inn was a popular spot before its owner, Bud Clark, was elected mayor of Portland 3 1/2 years ago. 
But the tavern has become even more the place to be seen since Mr. Clark shed his tavern keeper's apron and set up shop in City Hall. 
After the newly elected mayor appeared on national television and performed for Johnny Carson his signature "Whoop! 
Whoop!" call (said to be the mating call of the domestic guinea pig), more patrons, eager to drink from the same spigot as Portland's greatest celebrity, appeared in droves. 

   Except for some conservative segments of the electorate, most Portlanders are proud of their mayor's fame. 
Another point of local pride is that Mr. Clark is the bearded, half-naked man posing in a poster that has sold nearly half a million copies world-wide since it was produced in 1978. 

   "Expose Yourself to Art" is a black-and-white photo poster showing Mr. Clark in work boots and trench coat "flashing" a statue of a naked woman. 
Mike Ryerson, a local publisher, said he photographed his friend as a lark and later ran the photo in his monthly neighborhood newspaper as a caption contest. 

   With the winning caption, Mr. Ryerson produced a limited number of the posters, but had no luck peddling them locally. 
He was able to interest some national distributors, however, and now, almost 10 years later, Mr. Ryerson is still turning out about 2,000 copies a month. 

   Mr. Ryerson's distributors have told him that "Expose Yourself to Art" is the best-selling poster in the world. 
Globe-trotting patrons of the Goose Hollow Inn have reported seeing their mayor's image in New York, Europe, Australia and even China. 

   Not everybody in Portland is impressed. 
With Mr. Clark up for re-election in May, some of his opponents are pointing to the poster as an embarrassment. 
It was bad enough that the mayor performed guinea-pig noises for a national audience, they say, but now the whole world is getting a glimpse of his bare legs. 

   Also being disputed is Mr. Clark's proclivity for unusual sartorial selections. 
One of his innovations as mayor has been the annual Dress As You Please Day, when all Portlanders are encouraged to set aside their usual work garb and wear whatever's comfortable. 
Mr. Clark's favored outfit is lederhosen and a T-shirt. 

   One of the several candidates facing Mr. Clark in the May mayoral election, former police chief Ron Still, recently said in a press conference, "We need a mayor who knows when to wear lederhosen and when to wear a three-piece suit." 

   "He thinks mayors shouldn't wear lederhosen at all," sniffed Mr. Clark. 

   Mr. Clark says he rankles at the sobriquet of tavern keeper. 
He's a businessman, not a tavern keeper, he says. 
Besides, his wife, Sigrid, a violinist with the Oregon Symphony, has been the official tavern keeper since his election. 

   But with election time drawing near, Mr. Clark recognizes that his main support comes from the regulars at the Goose Hollow Inn. 
As one patron said, "I don't know about what kind of mayor he's been, but he's the best damn tavern keeper this town has ever seen." 

   ---
   Ms. Hauser is a free-lance journalist in Portland. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
