ID: 219	RANK: 64	SCORE: 9.594219
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881005-0053 </DOCNO>
<HL> LAB NOTES </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> GNE </CO>
<IN> PHA CMD </IN>
<TEXT>
      Putting Children Back
   On the Growth Track
   FINAL HUMAN trials are under way with a new drug to prevent short stature in slow-growing children. 

   For several years it was assumed that many slow-growing children were destined to be short or dwarfish adults because their pituitary glands were unable to produce normal amounts of growth hormone. 
Many such children today are treated with regular injections of genetically engineered, human growth hormone. 

   A few years ago researchers discovered that the hypothalamus in the brain produces a chemical that triggers the pituitary gland to make growth hormone. 
This led to the finding that many slow-growing children had normal pituitaries but a deficiency in "growth hormone releasing factor," or GHRF, produced by the hypothalamus. 

   GHRF is a simple chemical and is being made by Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., a Nutley, N.J., unit of the big Swiss drug maker of the same name. 
Because GHRF is synthetically produced, it should be considerably cheaper than the genetically engineered growth hormone, says a Hoffmann-La Roche researcher. 
In addition, he says, when the pituitary is stimulated by GHRF, it automatically produces only as much growth hormone as the body needs, whereas injections of genetically engineered growth hormone are somewhat arbitrary. (The genetically engineered growth hormone is produced by Genentech Inc., San Francisco.) 

   Early trials in slow-growing children whose pituitaries are normal showed only minor, temporary side effects such as a flushed face. 
Trials are now under way to confirm that GHRF can increase the rate of growth to near-normal levels. 
But neither GHRF nor growth hormone can make a child taller than he would have been with normal growth, the Roche researcher cautions. 

   Plant-Killing Bacteria
   Also Help Them Grow -
   NEW WAYS to boost plants' ability to make their own fertilizer out of thin air could result from a weird, newly discovered phenomenon in the bacterial world. 

   Certain bacteria, called rhizobia, ordinarily infest the roots of legumes like alfalfa and soybeans. 
These bacteria feed their hosts by extracting nitrogen from the air and creating ammonia which can be taken in by plants and which is a vital source of nitrogen. 
Recently, two scientists at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico added another species of bacteria to the rhizobia-infested alfalfa roots. 
To their astonishment, the alfalfa plants flourished, doubling their foliage and weight. 

   The irony was that the second species of bacteria, a variety of pseudomonas, normally kills nonleguminous plants, like oats, by making a toxin that blocks an early step in the plants' intake of ammonia from the soil. 
It also kills alfalfa -- unless the alfalfa roots are infested with rhizobia. 

   The puzzled researchers theorize that when the toxin blocks the main chemical route by which the ammonia gets from the rhizobia into the alfalfa, the plant resorts to emergency routes for getting the ammonia. 
The new routes don't have the normal stop-and-go chemical signals, so the rhizobia and their host go all out, grabbing and using twice as much nitrogen from the air as normal. 

   It would be impractical to infect fields of soybeans and alfalfa with the pseudomonas bacteria because they don't survive long in soil, says biochemist Pat J. Langston-Unkefer who, with Thomas J. Knight, reported the experiments in a recent issue of Science. 
But the researchers are talking to a biotechnology company to see if the same trick could be accomplished by genetic engineering. 

   Finding Test Animals
   To Use in AIDS Study
   AIDS RESEARCHERS are keeping an anxious eye on some rabbits in Italy. 

   A major obstacle in testing drugs and vaccines against acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS, is a lack of laboratory animals. 
So far, scientists have successfully infected only chimpanzees with HIV-1, the human immuno-deficiency virus that causes AIDS. 
But the chimps haven't developed the disease. 
Attempts to infect mice, rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, musk shrews and rabbits have failed. 

   Now scientists at three Italian institutions report they injected HIV-1 into the abdominal cavities of some rabbits after chemically stimulating the tissues in the cavities. 
Two weeks later the rabbits showed signs of building an immunity to the virus, a hint that an infection had occurred. 
Signs of infection continue to show up several months later. 
Unfortunately, the researchers haven't yet seen any signs of the immune deficiency disease, they report in Nature, the weekly scientific journal published in London. 

   Odds and Ends -
   MINOXIDIL, the drug found to regrow hair in balding men, seems to work even better in women with thinning hair, dermatologists at Yale University medical school report. . . . 
A new meter that tells how much of an electrical charge is left in the new lithium-sulfur dioxide batteries for communications and military equipment has been developed by chemists at Tel Aviv University in Israel; it saves users from discarding still-useful batteries. . . . 
Gourmet mushrooms will grow to maturity in three to six months, instead of one to three years, in a "soil" of sawdust and apple pomace wastes from cider mills, biologists at State University of New York in Syracuse find. . . . 
Eleven varieties of cheese, from aged cheddar and Swiss to mozzarella and Monterey Jack, inhibited acids that cause tooth plaque in human experiments at the University of Iowa dental school. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
