ID: 179	RANK: 29	SCORE: 10.489376
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870114-0091 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- In Concert:
Bigness Reigns at BAM
---
By Heidi Waleson</HL>
<DD> 01/14/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "This is gigantic," said Joe Melillo, director of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. 
"This is monumental. 
This is jumbo economy-size concert-making!" 
This is composer William Bolcom's setting of William Blake's "Songs of Innocence and Experience," for three choruses, 10 soloists, three conductors and an orchestra, 234 performers in all, and nearly three hours of music. 
For its three performances of the work last weekend, the festival built BAM's opera-house stage out into the audience and removed the acoustical stage shell, but parts of the Brooklyn Philharmonic, including the extra percussionists, still got pushed into the stage's right wing. 
Lukas Foss, the conductor, got an extra-tall podium to stand on, and Harry Salzman, the choral conductor, periodically popped up out of the violas to cue the singers. 
The production required 27 hours of rehearsal and cost $140,000. 

   Symphonic gigantism has a distinguished history: Consider Beethoven's Ninth, Mahler's Symphony of a Thousand and 19th-century performances of Handel's Messiah with choruses of a thousand and orchestras of hundreds. 
Contemporary composers, however, have had trouble getting even their string trios performed, let alone full orchestral works with choruses. 
But lately the tide seems to have turned. 
In 1984, BAM put on Steve Reich's orchestral version of "The Desert Music" for full orchestra and chorus; John Adams set poems of Emily Dickinson for large orchestra and chorus in "Harmonium," and David Del Tredici has written scores of several hours' duration for augmented orchestra. 
William Bolcom is obviously part of this trend to bigness, and he has a typically offhand explanation for it all: "A lot of us feel the orchestra's days are numbered, and we want to get our licks in while we can." 

   Not really as blase as he sounds, Mr. Bolcom is actually pretty amazed that his "Songs of Innocence" has just been produced for the fourth time here. (Dennis Russell Davies did the world premiere with the Stuttgart Opera in 1984, which was followed by a performance at the University of Michigan, where Mr. Bolcom teaches, and another last summer in Chicago.) 
He wrote the piece as a kind of celebration of school spirit: a way to bring together all the music departments at Michigan, and enable as many people to perform as possible. 
He never expected it to be performed "commercially," but has found that orchestras are interested in the work because of its size: "It's a blockbuster, good for gala affairs." 

   Commercial performances seem like a corruption of the work's intent, because it really is a celebration of school (or community) spirit, rather than a professional concert piece. 
"Songs of Innocence" harks back to the days of community music making, when everybody sang or played something, before music was turned over to professionals. 
The fun of the piece is for the people who are in it, and for their friends and family in the audience. 

   Mr. Bolcom also has another theory about the New Bigness: "Maybe big pieces are a way to generate an audience. 
If you have a big chorus, at least you know their families will be there." 

   As a concert piece, however, presented in a major hall, "Songs of Innocence and Experience" doesn't hang together. 
Mr. Bolcom set the songs piecemeal over 25 years, after being captivated by Blake at the age of 17. 
Although he is an academic composer, he is enamored of popular styles -- folk, rock, jazz, reggae -- and has incorporated them into the work, with varying degrees of success. 
Blake's "The Shepherd," for example, is rendered as an expressive country western ballad, and was sung convincingly by baritone Leslie Guinn. 
"The Little Black Boy" is astonishing proof of how an 18th-century poem can fit together comfortably with a 20th-century rock rhythm, although David Caldwell was an insipid exponent of that vocal style. 
The two "Nurse's Songs" were Bolcomized into simple folk melodies accompanied by acoustic guitar. 
Both were sung by mezzo-soprano Joan Morris, the composer's wife, his partner in a highly successful touring act of vintage American songs for voice and piano, and the best soloist in the show. 
"The Little Vagabond," also sung by Ms. Morris, was pure American music hall. 
Mr. Bolcom knows his styles, and he knows how to set text. 

   He can also write in more conventionally "classical" idioms: the heavy, dragging, close harmonies for chorus in "Ah, Sunflower" (performed jointly by the excellent Sine Nomine Singers as "madrigal chorus" and the full, if muddy, Brooklyn College Choir); and the fluid soprano leaps in "The Blossom" and "The Angel." 
Unfortunately, Blake's poems are short, and the styles shift dramatically from poem to poem, without giving the music a chance to build and create any kind of emotional impact. 
This is particularly true in "Songs of Innocence." (Perhaps innocence is inherently less interesting?) 
In the "Experience" sections, some of the poems are paired, which gave Mr. Bolcom more of a chance for dramatic shaping. 
But ultimately, this piece really is the sum of its parts, and while some are very fine, there are too many of them. 
The overall effect is one of surfeit, not unity. 

   This is a pity, because Mr. Bolcom is really a fine composer. 
On Sunday, while the third performance of "Songs of Innocence" was going on at BAM, Sergiu Luca was playing Mr. Bolcom's "Violin Concerto" with the American Composers Orchestra in Carnegie Hall. 
This is a true concert piece that any orchestra should be delighted to program: with its heart-on-the-sleeve adagio movement and with the influence of Joe Venuti's jazz violin in the finale, it makes a statement, speaks for its time and captures its audience. 
It's not gigantic. 
It's not jumbo economy-size concert-making, but it is probably a worthier candidate for the standard repertory than "Songs of Innocence." 
Mr. Bolcom's wicked "Cabaret Songs," performed by him and Ms. Morris on an RCA recording, also show off the composer to better advantage. 

   The Next Wave's presentation of "Songs of Innocence," as part of a heavily trendy festival, hyping its size and touting it as a timeless musical achievement, probably did the work a disservice. 
Listeners could only be disappointed. 
In his defense, Mr. Melillo says: "The Next Wave is chartered, mandated, to be a showcase for large-scale work. 
This production stands as a model of why the Next Wave Festival exists." 
Too bad. 
Perhaps other criteria should have more weight. 

   ---
   Ms. Waleson is a New York free-lancer who writes frequently about music. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
