ID: 179	RANK: 35	SCORE: 9.998968
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871229-0074 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<TEXT>
   Ten years ago, composers didn't bother to write pieces for orchestra because they knew they wouldn't be played. 
Today, 17 composers are or have been in residence with major orchestras across the U.S., the fruit of a big-budget program to rejuvenate the orchestral repertoire. 
In addition to acting as the gadfly for contemporary music in his or her host orchestra, something that has met with varying degrees of success, the composer-in-residence also is expected to write a piece for that orchestra. 
The orchestra then performs and records the work, which is released on a commercial label. 

   Five years into the program's projected 10-year span, four records, with pieces by five composers, have been released on Nonesuch. 
Three more already are in preparation, and John Duffy, head of the New York-based nonprofit organization Meet the Composer, which administers the program, says 20 records will be made altogether. 
The five composers already represented offer an intriguing if somewhat disturbing look at contemporary composition as defined by the Orchestra Residencies program. 
The fact is that four of the five pieces sound surprisingly similar. 

   The music directors of the orchestras select their composers-in-residence based on their music. (Another tenet of the program, more devoutly to be wished than actual in some cases, is that the conductor will become the champion of "his" composer's music.) 
All five composers are in their 30s and 40s. 
One, John Adams, chosen by Edo de Waart for the San Francisco Symphony for a job that became the model for the Residencies program, is considered a minimalist, although his compositions bear little resemblance to the works of Steve Reich or Philip Glass these days. 

   None of the others are affiliated with any particular movement. 
Libby Larsen and Stephen Paulus, Minnesota natives and co-founders of the Minnesota Composers Forum, were chosen by Neville Marriner for the Minnesota Orchestra. 
John Harbison, who won the 1987 Pulitzer Prize for Music, spent two stormy years at the Pittsburgh Symphony at the behest of Andre Previn (Mr. Previn heard a Harbison piece on his car radio one evening and was smitten), and then followed the maestro to his current post at the Los Angeles Philharmonic. 
Joseph Schwantner, who won the Pulitzer in 1979, uprooted himself from the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, N.Y., where he is a professor, to be in residence with the St. Louis Symphony and Leonard Slatkin for three years. 
The Slatkin-Schwantner and de Waart-Adams partnerships have been particularly fruitful, with the conductors playing many of the composers' pieces both with their own orchestras and as guest conductors. 

   Not one of these works -- which range from 13 to 40 minutes in length -- should send the audience screaming for the exits. 
If not formally tonal, they all sound tonal, and their dissonances are easy to take. 
Orchestral instruments are used idiomatically, without squeaking strings, prepared pianos or tormented woodwinds. 
There are recognizable melodies and lines, yet what drives most of these pieces is heavy-duty rhythm and experimentation with orchestral color. 
Sometimes there is so much color that you're not really sure what the picture is. 

   Mr. Paulus's "Symphony in Three Movements" falls most heavily into that trap: It is so busy with instruments and motives that it is difficult to see any larger plan for all the details. 
Ms. Larsen's "Symphony: Water Music," on the other hand, is serenely pictorial (according to the liner notes, she has "always found nature the most important inspiration for her music"), and it is fresh, lively and pretty. 
Mr. Schwantner's "A Sudden Rainbow" (the shortest, at 13 minutes) is the least lyrical and most coloristic of the five. 
It uses a lot of percussion, contrasts different sound registers and choirs of instruments for a more transparent effect, and uses a single gesture -- a glissando that represents the sudden appearance of the rainbow -- as a unifying factor. 
Its characteristic use of fragments and color is also recognizably Schwantner. 

   Mr. Harbison's as yet unchoreographed ballet score "Ulysses' Bow" also has a distinctive profile. 
It is a graphic and poetic representation of its story: Ulysses' return from his wanderings, and his ousting of Penelope's suitors. 
Mr. Harbison works out his ideas efficiently in five brief scenes and four even briefer interludes, each with its own identifiable character. 
The orchestra is rich, even Mahlerian. 
The angular, Stravinskian depiction of Penelope's suitors as nasty, taunting children is wonderful, but not all the scenes work as well -- the more lyrical sections are limp. 

   By contrast with the others, Mr. Adams's "Harmonielehre" has an argument, a beginning, a middle and an end. 
The composer does not get lost in coloristic experimentation; he focuses on musical and emotional ideas that he works out. 
The 40-minute piece opens with crashing chords that touch off the disturbance and torment of the first two sections, only to subside into an ethereal vision of redemption in the third. 
The repetitive patterns of minimalism appear, but most often as a kind of throbbing stasis that other voices circle around and rise above. 
It is a deeply disturbing, probing piece, and also the most personal and expressive of the five. 

   Indeed, all of the pieces except "Harmonielehre" occupy a kind of middle ground between a full-throated tonality (as exemplified by the works of David Del Tredici) and the non-tonal dissonance that contemporary composers feel they must embrace in order to be considered serious. 
This is what is coming to be called the New Romanticism. 
It is an idiom that doesn't terrify the audience, but the threat of tameness is dangerous too in the long run. 
Perhaps the orchestra as a medium is bringing out the conservative side of these composers -- the spare, acerbic "Samuel Chapter" for voice and chamber ensemble that fills out Mr. Harbison's record is in quite a different mode from "Ulysses' Bow," for example, as is his "Flight Into Egypt," which won the Pulitzer. 

   Interested conductors point out that contemporary music is becoming somewhat more acceptable in concert halls because composers are writing more "accessibly." 
Are they all -- or are those just the ones being chosen by the powerful Orchestra Residencies program? 
All of these pieces are worth listening to, and whatever their stylistic drawbacks, their existence in performance and on records is an important step forward for American orchestras. 
But one can't help wondering what else is out there. 

   ---
   Ms. Waleson is a free-lance music writer based in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
