ID: 179	RANK: 44	SCORE: 9.404671
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880203-0153 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Steve Reich: Maximum Minimalist </HL>
<AUTHOR> Barbara Jepson </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In 1973, when Michael Tilson Thomas conducted "Four Organs" by Steve Reich on a Boston Symphony Orchestra program at Carnegie Hall, rival factions in the audience bellowed boos and bravos. 
As the 20-minute minimalist work unfolded, with its single, six-note chord repeated obsessively in myriad rhythmic variations, a man in the balcony stood up and cried, "Stop, stop, I'll confess!" 

   "After it was over," recalls the composer, now 51, "Michael said, 'This is great; this is history.' 
And I said, 'Are you sure?'" 

   Today, all-Reich concerts sell out major halls, Mr. Reich's recordings make the top 10 on the Billboard classical charts, and a series of increasingly large-scale works have brought him far from his early minimalist roots. 
Yet his works remain as controversial as ever. 

   Detractors call them "stuck needle" music because of the repetitive rhythmic and melodic patterns. 
Barbs like that are one reason why Mr. Reich attended the New York Philharmonic rehearsals last month of his latest work, "The Four Sections," in "heavy body armor." 
As it turned out, he found "the vibes from the Philharmonic musicians better than they were when the piece was premiered by the San Francisco Symphony" last fall. 
Moreover, Zubin Mehta, whose conducting usually vacillates between the perfunctory and the vulgar, carefully shaped and sustained the swirling canons for strings in the opening movement. 
Images of slow-motion square dances came to mind. 

   Overall, "The Four Sections" is a more restrained work than, say, the rollicking "Sextet" (1985), a personal favorite available on Nonesuch. 
But other performers have brought more bounce to the pulsating rhythms in its faster movements. 

   Indeed, having his works performed by leading orchestras has been a major change for this aging young Turk. 
In 1966, he founded Steve Reich and Musicians, and this cadre of expert players was the primary vehicle for performances of his music prior to 1982. (The group will perform an all-Reich program at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis on Feb. 13.) 
On stage, in their mandatory white shirts, they convey an ardent understanding of Mr. Reich's idiom: richly textured tonal harmonies, colorful percussion and infectious rhythms influenced by African drumming and jazz. 

   They're also accustomed to his "Type A" personality. 
A direct, voluble man who doesn't mince words if, say, the sound equipment isn't up to par on tour, he has tried to maintain similar control over performances of his orchestral works by other entities. 
Mr. Thomas, who led the Brooklyn Philharmonic in the American premiere of "The Desert Music" (1984) and the world premiere of "The Four Sections," notes: "Steve gets involved in everything from the stage setup to the kind of extension cords used to plug in the vibraphones. 
He's very fierce about wanting every detail right." 

   That doesn't always happen in orchestral situations with limited rehearsal time. 
"With my ensemble," says the composer, "we typically spend 36 to 42 hours spread over a few months learning a new piece." 
At the New York Philharmonic, by contrast, Mr. Reich got nearly six of the nine hours of available rehearsal time devoted to his piece -- a generous proportion but considerably less than ideal. 
"It took me the better part of a year to write this piece," he says. 
"So, yes, it's being done and that's wonderful, but where do you as a composer fit into the scheme of things? 
Basically, you're just squeezing under the door." 

   Partly for these reasons, and partly because "I just don't have any more of that in me," Mr. Reich calls "The Four Sections" his farewell to the orchestra for the near future. 
Unlike his so-called minimalist colleagues, Philip Glass and John Adams, he has no plans to write an opera, either. 

   "I hate opera," he declares, running a hand through his short, dark brown hair. 
"The conventions -- aria recitatives, the whole vocal style -- are from another time. 
To change the musical language or the subject matter doesn't set it up for me as a music drama. 
You get composers today who are trying to create something contemporary and immediate, yet once the singers open their mouths you're back into 17th-, 18th-, 19th-century Italy. 
It grinds my gears and it hurts my ears." 

   Instead, he is tackling a piece for string quartet and tape for the Kronos Quartet, and mulling over ideas for a mixed media piece involving his ensemble as well as recorded voices from the World War II period. 
"It's gonna be a whole new page," he says. 
"It will go back to 'Come Out' and 'It's Gonna Rain.'" 
These two seminal works from the mid-1960s use recorded speech on tape loops that gradually go out of phase with each other. 

   In those days, Mr. Reich -- a native New Yorker who studied piano and drums as a child -- was struggling to make the $65-a-month payments on a loft in what is now trendy Tribeca. 
He performed his music for a small coterie of fans from the SoHo art community but didn't consider a compositional career until he enrolled at Cornell as a philosophy major. 
After studies at the Juilliard School and Mills College in Oakland, Calif., he lived in San Francisco, where he supported himself by driving a cab and working as a postal clerk. 

   When he returned to New York and founded his ensemble, his Juilliard buddy Philip Glass came back from Paris. 
For a time, the two shared compositional discoveries and performers. 
To help make ends meet, they even established the Chelsea Light Moving Co., which transported lighting fixtures for Bowery wholesalers. 
As interest in their early minimalist works extended beyond the downtown music scene, however, tensions developed and they became bitter rivals. 
"I've just decided that the less said in print about this the better," says Mr. Reich. 

   Today, he and his wife, artist Beryl Korot, share quarters in a comfortable lower Manhattan loft with their son, Ezra, and two dogs. 
And the composer "walks a tightrope" between performing with his ensemble and writing his music. 
Over the years, he has proved the most intellectually engaging of the minimalists despite pressure from what Mr. Thomas describes as "the arbiters of musical fashion as to whether his works should be more 'uptown' or 'downtown.' 
What's important about Steve's music is that it transcends both those boundaries." 

   It will be interesting to hear how Mr. Reich's music, starting with the Kronos commission, evolves over the next few years. 
"By forcing myself to look at something old, something new, at the same time," he asserts, "I'm sort of dealing myself a wild card." 
From the composer of "Four Organs," we expect no less. 

   ---
   Ms. Jepson is a free-lance music writer in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
