ID: 179	RANK: 62	SCORE: 8.838055
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871020-0051 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Glasnost in Louisville: Soviets Join Sound Celebration
---
By Heidi Waleson</HL>
<DD> 10/20/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Louisville, Ky.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The overwhelming images of the first two days of the Louisville Orchestra's Sound Celebration festival had to do with "glasnost" (openness), though not exclusively of the Gorbachev variety. 

   There was the Muir String Quartet digging into Soviet composer Sofia Gubaidulina's String Quartet No. 3, deprived of its bows by the composer for the first half of the piece, and desperate to communicate. 
The composer herself was there, on her first trip to the U.S. Delicate, intense, with a fringe of chin-length hair and Tartar cheekbones, she spoke like an evangelist with a passion to which no translation could have possibly done justice. 
And then there was Vladimir Ussachevsky, tall and solemn, like a great craggy bird, manning the tape recorder in his 1954 "Rhapsodic Variations" for tape recorder and orchestra. 
The piece, written with Otto Luening, generated considerable fear and loathing at its premiere by the Louisville Orchestra more than 30 years ago. 
This time, it provoked only cheers. 

   Have the shockers of the past been mellowed by time into acceptable fare? 
Is nothing new shocking anymore? 
Well, maybe, "Rhapsodic Variations" isn't exactly standard repertory, and its latest Louisville audience was made up primarily of the converted. 
Still, the composers, performers and critics who came to Louisville recently from all over the world to compare notes and make music represented plenty of different schools and styles, and everybody seemed interested in hearing everyone else's offerings, both musical and verbal (with simultaneous translation in Spanish, Portuguese, Russian and English). 
Everyone was hailing diversity and tolerance. 
No academic hard-lining was allowed. 

   Take the opening concert of chamber music by non-American composers, which was all different, yet all easy to take. 
Jenny McLeod's "For Seven" (1966) was all Darmstadt-style fragments and sonorities, pitting flute against vibraphone and d-piano against marimba and strings for haunting bits of sound. 
Jan Carlstedt, a dour Swede, brought back line and tonality with his darkly lyrical "Metamorphoser" (1974) for violin, viola, cello, flute and oboe. 
Then came Ms. Gubaidulina's quartet, shifting at last from desperate plucked notes into a stratospheric, bowed solo for violin, the ultimate in chamber music as theater. 
Finally came "Appendix" (1983) by Pawel Szymanski, a Polish post-minimalist who wittily combined a piccolo soloist with an elephantine polka and a Mahlerian trombone line. 

   Such music is not new to the Louisville orchestra. 
In the 1950s it made the corporate decision to commission works rather than pay expensive guest soloists. 
There was a new piece on every program, and recordings preserved these efforts. 
Lately, Louisville's zeal for new music has subsided somewhat. 
The orchestra's regular programming this season mostly reflects symphonic tradition. 
There are star soloists, and only one contemporary work (John Adams's "Harmonielehre") on the 10 subscription programs. 
Recording efforts are slow too. 
But the orchestra's music director, Lawrence Leighton Smith, is a new-music enthusiast, and the Grawemeyer Award for music composition, the biggest cash prize in the arts, is administered by the University of Louisville. 
So the orchestra's board president, lawyer Philip Lanier, while not a new-music enthusiast himself, decided that a good way to celebrate the orchestra's 50th birthday would be to call attention to its historical niche. 

   Mr. Lanier hooked up with the U.S. Information Agency, which was quite interested in bringing composers and performers over, and then hosting them for two additional weeks while they visited other new-music centers in the U.S. 
The festival consisted of two chamber music concerts; two concerts of American orchestral music, one "old" and one "new"; and a final benefit for the orchestra that featured a newly commissioned work by Ezra Laderman, a piece by the Grawemeyer winner, Harrison Birtwhistle, and, in a bow to box-office realism, the Beethoven Violin Concerto with Itzhak Perlman. 

   Ms. Gubaidulina's presence was an even bigger coup. 
She is one of the three most prominent composers now working in the Soviet Union (the others are Alfred Schnittke and Edison Denisov); her music has been introduced in the U.S. by violinist Gidon Kremer. 
The Boston Symphony will be playing and possibly recording her "Offertorium" this spring, and the Kronos Quartet will perform her String Quartet No. 2 in New York in January. 
So her U.S. career seems to be launched. 

   Glasnost has been good to Ms. Gubaidulina. 
She has made seven trips to the West since August 1986, when she was allowed to travel abroad for the first time, at the age of 56. 

   "It is an extraordinary event in the country, this openness," she explained through an interpreter. 
"I think that now in Moscow we have a situation beginning which is going to mean more hearing of new music, and promote creative achievement on the part of composers. 
New art in general has been lacking, but in Moscow there is a hunger for new music. 
In people's eyes, I can see how much they need people who are thinking about new things. 
It doesn't have to be avant-garde, it has to meet spiritual needs." 

   In Louisville, Ms. Gubaidulina was especially interested to hear the music of Mr. Birtwhistle (she herself was a Grawemeyer finalist). 
She also enjoyed sitting down with the other composers to listen to tapes, and was particularly impressed with the the Szymanski piece. 
"Such clear seeing, and humor! 
It reminded me of 'Petrouchka.'" 

   On other recent trips abroad, she has met Luigi Nono, Peter Maxwell Davies and Gyorgy Kurtag. 
Stopping in New York on the way home, she visited Mr. Ussachevsky's computer studio and was most impressed. 
"I am sure that my travels will affect my music," she says. 

   Glasnost has also been good to Lawrence Leighton Smith. 
Last year he went to the Soviet Union to record with the Moscow Philharmonic, the first time an American conductor has done so. 
He says: "It can get corny to say that music is a universal language, but it really is. 
Musicians are musicians." 

   But audiences are audiences. 
Getting them to embrace a policy of openness may be harder than converting governments. 
Still, his first orchestral concert was devoted to saluting Louisville's historical commitment to the new. 

   Three of the works programmed for the festival were Louisville commissions. 
The Luening-Ussachevsky piece, hailed as the first nail in the coffin of music at its premiere, sounds gentle today. 
The tape soloist with his manipulated instrumental sounds provided a curious, seamless collaboration for human musicians. 

   Also on the program was Aaron Copland's difficult, acerbic "Orchestral Variations" (1957) and William Schuman's expansive "Judith," a tone poem written for Martha Graham to dance. 
It got such a strong response in 1949 that it kept the orchestra from going out of business. 

   Current American composer notables Ellen Taaffe Zwilich, Charles Wuorinen, Gunther Schuller and Ezra Laderman were in the audience to hear their forebears' works, and ultimately that seemed to be what the festival was all about -- a celebration of the new-music ghetto held for and by its own denizens. 
If the festival is repeated, as Messrs. 
Smith and Lanier intend (money permitting, of course), perhaps regular Louisvillians will be enticed to join in the fun. 
More people should get to hear Otto Luening and Vladimir Ussachevsky tell stories about being thrown out of artist colonies for making strange noises on tape, to say nothing of hearing their music. 

   ---
   Ms. Waleson is a free-lance music writer based in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
