ID: 179	RANK: 80	SCORE: 8.084421
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870722-0136 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Granted, Richard Nixon is no Orpheus. 
And Pat, his wife, isn't quite Eurydice. 
But then, it's probably time composers quit rehashing old themes and wrote something relevant. 

   So what do we get? 
"Nixon in China," an operatic interpretation of the former president's historic 1972 visit to the People's Republic. 

   The action includes a sightseeing jaunt for Pat, a visit to Mao Tse-tung's study by the Nixons and Henry Kissinger, a night at the Peking opera and a banquet at which Mao dances a foxtrot. 
Among the noteworthy numbers are a Mao-Nixon duet -- "Did You Have a Pleasant Trip?" -- and Mr. Nixon's solo aria "Nick's Hamburger Stand," a drunken tribute to his Navy days on a tropical island. 

   Though the title "probably makes (people) think it will be a 'Saturday Night Live' skit," that's not the case, says a spokeswoman for New York's Brooklyn Academy of Music, where the work will be performed after an October premiere in Houston. 
Alice Goodman, the librettist, explains that it is neither satire nor psychodrama but a "heroic opera." 
She says the subject was chosen for its "beautiful dramatic structure" as well as for the "East-and-West stuff." 

   For inspiration, Ms. Goodman drew on books, tapes and old newsweeklies. 
But she didn't try to contact Mr. Nixon, his wife or Mr. Kissinger directly. 
"I had no interest in talking to them," she says. 
"They're not the same people they were then, and I didn't wish to prejudice" the material by hearing their recollections of the trip. 

   John Adams, the opera's composer, says that he eschewed often-used classical myths because "it seemed to me the subconscious of our culture is really more profoundly affected by myths of the great world figures, and in Nixon and in Mao I was able to identify very strong archetypes." 
Ms. Goodman concurs, adding that Mr. Nixon's role as a mythical figure is often overlooked "because so many people hate him." 

   Christopher Watson, a San Francisco producer who attended a concert-version preview of the opera, allows that despite a "pretty strong negative opinion" of the real-life Mr. Nixon's actions, he found the opera intriguing and even touching. 
His favorite parts, he says, were "when Pat visits the pig farm," and the appearance of the "three Mao-ettes," whom he likens to "the Supremes in the background . . . like a backup, giving the masses' endorsement of Mao and his pronouncements." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
