ID: 312	RANK: 90	SCORE: 17.871149
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880104-0088 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Hurricanes Bowl Over Sooners </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Football is played by big fellas, so it is easy to underestimate its mental side. 
The cognoscenti, however, aver that something as wispy as an idea can give pause to a rampant, 280-pound tackle. 

   "Yeah, Oklahoma's a great team, but, you see, we'd planted the seed of doubt in their minds, and I believe it helped us tonight," said a celebration-wet Jimmy Johnson in his Miami locker room after the undefeated scholars he coaches had defeated favored and previously undefeated Oklahoma in the New Year's Day Orange Bowl game. 

   "We planted that seed when we beat 'em in Norman (Okla.) in '85, and it grew when we beat 'em again here last season. 
This year, everybody kept saying how tough they were, but they were thinking about how we were out here, waiting for 'em. 
When we scored first tonight, it just grew some more." 

   Johnson was then moved in other conversational directions, but the conclusion of his thought was clear: It's tough to move fast when you're dragging a tree. 

   The theory will serve as well as any to explain why Miami can do what nobody else in college football can, which is beat Oklahoma. 
Barry Switzer's fearsome Sooners are 33-3over the last three campaigns, and they routinely buried opponents by 50 or 60 points, but their record against Miami in that stretch is 0-3.
The latest installment, by a 20-14count on Friday night, made the Hurricanes the 1987 collegiate national champions. 

   The contest was well and fairly played, which was notable in itself given the pregame woofing between the combatants and the reputations they brought to the fray. 
The two teams, you see, have had recurring difficulties with the authorities over the years, and haven't always come off smelling like roses, or even orange blossoms. 
My son, Michael, opined that their Friday meeting was the moral equivalent of the Iran-Iraq war. 
The college-aged tend to be harsh in such judgments, but his point was not without merit. 

   Miami has attracted considerable dubious attention of late. 
Last season, team members were mentioned in the local police blotters almost as often as on the sports pages. 
They were better behaved off the field during the just-concluded campaign, but their on-field decorum was faulted by some foes, including Notre Dame's Heisman Award winner, Tim Brown. 
"They taunt you and talk about your momma," Brown remarked after the 'Canes spanked him and his mates, 24-0, here in November. 

   More seriously, two Hurricane starters were barred from Friday's game after traces of Lasix, a diuretic that can mask the presence of other drugs, including steroids, turned up in NCAA-administered urine tests. 
The findings recalled reports from team insiders last season --never officially substantiated --that steroid use was widespread among the 'Canes. 
Users of the muscle-building substances run long-term health risks. 
The drugs' presence in college sports, often with at least the tacit approval of coaches, is a shame and a disgrace. 

   Oklahoma had its own drug bust last season, when linebacker Brian Bosworth tested positive for steroids and was kept out of the 1987 Orange Bowl game, which matched the Sooners and Arkansas. 
Oklahoma has been on NCAA probation for recruiting misdeeds a couple of times, and was under investigation again this season, although, as coach Switzer has noted, the alleged violations "aren't things you get the electric chair for." 

   Johnson is similarly sanguine about his team's trials. 
"People always throw rocks at the guy on top," he says. 
"Really, we're good people. 
We work hard, we graduate, and we win." 

   Win they did on Friday, and more convincingly than the final score or the nearly equal total-yardage figures (281 to 255) indicate. 
Miami got a touchdown on its first possession, and the first half ended tied at 7 only because Oklahoma capitalized on the 'Canes' lone turnover, an interception of a Steve Walsh pass, to drive 49 yards to score. 
The home team made it 20-7before the Sooners got a late touchdown on a 79-yard drive capped by a play in which their center fake-snapped the ball and left it on the ground for guard Mark Hutson to pick up and run with while his teammates decoyed Miami in other directions. 
The play is called a "fumblerooski," and, yes, it's legal. 

   Whatever its psychological underpinnings, the 'Canes triumph also stemmed from the fact they had better players than the Sooners, and a more-varied attack. 
Miami could run and pass, while Oklahoma could only run from its four-back "Wishbone" formation. 
And, dogged by the Hurricane defenders, the Sooners didn't do even that well despite a huge offensive line featuring two All-Americans. 
Their 179 rushing yards Friday were less than half their nation-leading regular-season average of 429. 

   The key to that, said the 'Canes, was superior team speed. 
"We got off the ball faster than their big linemen, so they couldn't lay on us," noted defensive end Daniel Stubbs. 
"They were too big," offered tackle Derwin Jones. 
"They had some big bellies out there, and they were sucking wind in the second half." 

   Miami's two touchdowns came on passes by Walsh, their spindly-looking sophomore quarterback, after the Sooners had been properly softened by the run. 
Greg Cox chipped in field goals of 56 and 48 yards, and the Miami punter, Jeff Feagles, kept the Sooners on their heels with his boomers. 
Except for its first-half touchdown drive, Oklahoma never started an offensive series outside its own 26-yard line. 

   It was a satisfying evening all around for Miami, which last season lost its No. 1 ranking to Penn State in a Fiesta Bowl upset, but whether it will change the team's rogue image remains to be seen. 

   "We're still the black hats --the bad guys," smiled safety Bennie Blades in the victors' locker room. 
"The only thing'd cure that would be an invitation to the White House." 

   What would he do if he got one? 
"Shake hands with the President, and compare notes," he said. 
"He's had some problems, too, you know." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
