ID: 141	RANK: 73	SCORE: 13.684523
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881105-0130 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-11-05-88 1854EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a AM-WeatherpageWeather     11-05 0735</FIRST>
<SECOND>AM-Weatherpage Weather,0757</SECOND>
<HEAD>Tornadoes And Snowstorm On Same Day</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   A strong, early snow storm blasted the upper Great Lakes region
Saturday, while late-season tornadoes killed one person and caused
scattered damage in parts of Florida and North Carolina.
   Strong thunderstorms spread over the Southeast during the morning.
   A tornado touched down in the community of Lee, Fla., in the
northern part of the state, and one person was killed, authorities
said.
   At least six houses were destroyed, 10 more were damaged and one
business was damaged, said Mary Sampsom, a director of a local Red
Cross chapter.
   The National Weather Service also reported several tornado
sightings from the central Gulf coast to counties inland. Between
midnight and 2 a.m. CDT, three tornados ripped up trees, downed
power lines, tore off shingles and flattened signs and wooden fences
in Bay County. No one was injured, but three houses were damaged.
   Wind blew at more than 70 mph during a severe thunderstorm in
Levy County, Fla., and trees and power lines were reported down in
neighboring Citrus County, where gusts up to 57 mph were recorded.
   Tornadoes also touched down in two northeastern North Carolina
counties, causing property damage but no injuries, authorities said.
   One twister touched down near Elizabeth City State University and
in several residential areas in Elizabeth City, authorities said.
The other twister took the roof off a rural house in Currituck
County.
   The Elizabeth City tornado ``kind of took everyone by surprise''
because twisters rarely occur in November, said police Sgt. H.L.
Bunch.
   Thunderstorm wind gusts were measured to 52 mph at Cape Hatteras,
N.C., and 70 mph at Cedar Key, Fla., the weather service said.
   Winter storm warnings were posted through the night over the
western third of Upper Michigan and northwestern and north-central
Wisconsin, and a snow advisory was issued for eastern Minnesota as a
storm blew through with high wind and heavy snow.
   By midmorning there was 10 inches of new snow at Ironwood, Mich.,
and up to 18 inches was possible in parts of Upper Michigan.
   Four to 6 inches of snow had fallen by midmorning at Phillips,
Wis., and several vehicles slid off roads, said Sgt. Ross Homsa of
the St. Croix County Sheriff Department.
   High wind and blowing snow was expected to cut visibility in some
areas to below a mile, authorities and meterologists said.
   ``We shouldn't have this to just until about the hunting season,
about mid-November'' Homsa said. ``We have snow occasionally before
then, but not like this.''
   In extreme northeastern Minnesota only 1 to 3 inches of snow
fell, but high wind blew it into drifts about a foot deep.
   South of the snow belt, freezing rain was scattered over
northeastern Wisconsin, with showers over the lower Great Lakes,
Lower Michigan, Ohio Valley, central through southern Wisconsin,
Illinois, much of Missouri and southeastern Iowa.
   Heavier rain during the six hours up to 1 p.m. EST including 1.29
inches at Cleveland, Ohio, and 1.13 inches at Parkersburg, W.Va.
During the same period, an inch of snow fell in Minnesota at Duluth
and Minneapolis-St. Paul.
   Rain also extended from the Idaho Panhandle across the northern
Pacific Coast.
   High wind warnings were posted over parts of Washington state and
Oregon. Gusts to 58 mph were measured near Bellingham Bay, Wash.,
and gusts up to 70 mph were possible.
   Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 28
degrees at Bemidji, Fergus Falls and Hibbing, Minn., to 90 at Vero
Beach, Fla. Saturday morning's official low was 14 degrees at
Yellowstone National Park, Wyo.
   For Sunday, rain was forecast from New England across the
Virginias, the upper two thirds of the Appalachians, the Ohio
Valley, the lower Great Lakes, Lower Michigan and northeastern
Illinois, changing to snow over Upper Michigan and Wisconsin. Rain
also was forecast from the northern Rockies across the northern and
central Pacific Coast. Strong gusty wind was forecast over the
northern half of the Rockies and the upper Missouri Valley.
   Highs in the 30s and 40s were predicted over the Great Lakes, the
Ohio Valley, the upper half of the Mississippi Valley and much of
the Dakotas; in the 70s over central California; in the 70s and 80s
over Florida, Texas and New Mexico; in the 80s and low 90s through
the desert Southwest; and generally in the 50s and 60s over the
remainder of the nation.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
