ID: 141	RANK: 99	SCORE: 12.729302
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP881228-0048 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-12-28-88 0615EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-WeatherpageWeather     12-28 0751</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Weatherpage Weather,0772</SECOND>
<HEAD>Snow in the Midwest, Tornadoes in the South</HEAD>
<BYLINE>By The Associated Press</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
   Snow fell in the Midwest today, stranding hundreds of travelers
in St. Louis, after tornadoes and thunderstorms demolished trailers,
blew roofs off houses or uprooted utility poles in the South.
   Twisters or strong winds struck Tuesday in Arkansas, Mississippi,
Louisiana and Texas, and tornado watches remained in effect today in
Louisiana and Mississppi. Snowstorms that began Tuesday continued
today in Arkansas, Indiana, Missouri and Illinois
   In Mississippi, thunderstorm winds destroyed a mobile home in
Minter City, and demolished a trailer in Anguilla, the National
Weather Service said. A tornado reported in Belzoni damaged three
mobile homes, a car and a service station, and a twister touched
down near Lake Horn, Miss., just southwest of Memphis, Tenn.
   Tornadoes also touched down near West Memphis and Marion, Ark.
   Thunderstorm winds blew out windows in Natchez, Miss., and
uprooted seven utility poles and blew roofs off houses elsewhere in
the state, the weather service said. Winds gusting to 81 mph were
recorded in Rolling Fork.
   Strong winds overturned trailers and downed trees near Lake
Providence, La., and 66 mph gusts blew through Beaumont, Texas.
   In Indiana, a winter storm warning was posted and up to 8 inches
of snow were expected.
   In St. Louis, which had 5 inches of snow by late Tuesday, the
storm caused TWA to cancel 110 of 120 flights Tuesday night for
Lambert Airport, said TWA spokesman Bob Blattner. The airline
reserved 800 hotel rooms for passengers, he said.
   Meanwhile, things were returning to normal at Chicago's O'Hare
International Airport, where a snowstorm stranded thousands of
travelers Tuesday.
   Sections of the northern California coast that hadn't gotten any
snow in 12 years got a dusting Tuesday, causing a pileup of more
than 30 cars and a liquid propane tanker spill, closing highways,
forcing the homeless into shelters and worrying citrus growers. No
serious injuries were reported.
   In Utah, fog and ice Tuesday triggered a 67-car pileup on
Interstate 215 south of Salt Lake City, leaving 15 people with minor
injuries.
   Elsewhere today, rain spread from Ohio to Pennsylvania and New
York state, and sleet fell on Lower Michigan. A mix of rain and snow
fell over California's Sacramento Valley late Tuesday, and falling
temperatures were expected to make area roads icy.
   The nation's high Tuesday was 88 degrees in McAllen and Beeville,
Texas, where President-elect Bush was hunting quail
   Today's forecast called for snow from northern New England to
northern New York state, northwest Ohio, northern Indiana and
Michigan and in the Arizona mountains; snow becoming rain from the
rest of New England to the Virginias and the rest of the Ohio
Valley; showers from the inland Carolinas to the Tennessee Valley
and the central Gulf Coast and in Southern California; rain along
the northern Pacific Coast, changing to snow in the Pacific
Northwest.
   High temperatures were forecast in the single digits from eastern
Montana to North Dakota and Minnesota; the teens and 20s from the
rest of the upper Great Lakes to the remaining upper two-thirds of
the Mississippi Valley, South Dakota and northern Nebraska, and from
Montana to northern New Mexico, northern Arizona and Nevada. The 30s
and 40s were expected in northern New England, the lower Great
Lakes, the lower Ohio Valley and Arkansas, and from southern
Nebraska to Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandel, and in the northern
two-thirds of the Pacific Coast; the 70s in South Carolina,
southeast Georgia and the Florida Panhandlel; the 80s in the Florida
Peninsula and the 50s and 60s in the rest of the nation.
   Temperatures around the nation at 2 a.m. EST ranged from minus 15
degrees at Havre, Mont., to 75 degrees at Key West, Fla.
   Other reports:
   _East: Atlanta 53 cloudy; Boston 44 cloudy; Buffalo 46 rain;
Charleston, S.C. 66 cloudy; Cincinnati 43 rain; Cleveland 42 rain;
Detroit 33 cloudy; Miami 72 fair; New York 45 cloudy; Philadelphia
48 cloudy; Pittsburgh 48 cloudy; Portland, Maine 32 cloudy;
Washington 51 cloudy.
   _Central: Bismarck -4 snow; Chicago 18 partly cloudy; Dallas-Fort
Worth 31 fair; Denver 0 fair; Des Moines 11 fair; Indianapolis 25
snow; Kansas City 20 windy; Minneapolis-St. Paul 3 fair; Nashville
48 showers; New Orleans 72 cloudy; St. Louis 22 cloudy.
   _West: Albuquerque 15 fair; Anchorage 26 snow; Las Vegas 34
cloudy; Los Angeles 44 fair; Phoenix 36 fair; Salt Lake City 11
cloudy; San Diego 48 rain; San Francisco 47 cloudy; Seattle 32 fair.
   _Canada: Montreal 27 cloudy; Toronto 37 cloudy.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
