ID: 231	RANK: 100	SCORE: 11.345859
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880707-0084 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Early Music's Irrepressible Evangelist </HL>
<AUTHOR> Mark Swed </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Ojai, Calif  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Nicholas McGegan remembers the old days with a smile -- the old days back in the '60s and '70s before the early music movement had become big business, when people interested in it were "a group of bearded, besandaled people carrying little bags of brown rice and playing funny old instruments." 
Today, as music director of the Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra, a San Francisco-based group that performs on period instruments, or copies of them, Mr. McGegan can now bring the early music gospel to an eager and much broader public. 

   Recordings of Bach and Handel and, lately, Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven, played on historic instruments at what are thought to be authentic (usually very fast) tempos sell better than Pavarotti these days (two period-instrument recordings currently are higher on the Billboard classical charts than is a new version of "Norma" with Mr. Pavarotti and Joan Sutherland). 
And several conductors specializing in historical performance have become superstars. 
Christopher Hogwood's period-instrument recordings of Mozart symphonies gave the movement its first mainstream success. 
Trevor Pinnock followed with best-selling Bach and Handel recordings. 
And Roger Norrington is being hailed widely as the next major Beethoven conductor, on the evidence of his recordings of Beethoven symphonies on period instruments. 

   Behind this boom lies sound scholarship about editions and instruments and performing practices. 
Curiously, however, it is the conductors who have put the movement on the map. 
And conductors are the most unhistoric aspect of the whole movement, since conductors as we know them are a mid-19th-century phenomenon. 
Before then, the relatively small orchestras of the time either conducted themselves or were led from the pit by a performing musician, usually the harpsichordist. 

   That he himself is an anachronism does not at all faze Mr. McGegan. 
A 38-year-old born in Cambridge, England, he grew up in the early music movement, starting out as a flutist in Mr. Hogwood's ensemble, the Academy of Ancient Music. 
There, he learned that the performance side of authentic performance is as important as its authenticity. 
"If a performance is dull," the conductor said, taking a break from his duties as this year's music director of the Ojai Festival, "then the dullness affects everything; it doesn't matter how correct it is." 

   Dullness and pedantry are not Mr. McGegan's problems. 
He is early music's answer to Leonard Bernstein -- and to Groucho Marx. 
To inspire a chorus singing of shivering from the cold during Ojai's opening-night performance of Purcell's "King Arthur," he made his own hands shake and quaver, in what looked like Groucho putting the whammy on "Il Trovatore" in "A Night at the Opera." 
Mr. McGegan habitually grins and dances on the podium, making dramatic points emerge from the orchestra with his whole body, Bernstein fashion, but the effect is not phony. 
He appears simply unable to rein himself in and play it straight when he conducts. 

   Mr. McGegan never lets musicological expertise interfere with a performance, or, for that matter, contradict late 20th-century sensibilities. 
For instance, last month, he led a production of Monteverdi's "The Return of Ulysses to his Fatherland" at the highly innovative Long Beach Opera south of Los Angeles. 
The orchestra and the edition that he chose were both perfectly historic, but the staging by Christopher Alden proceeded in the latest postmodern fashion. 
Ulysses here was a crippled Vietnam veteran returning home in a wheelchair; the gods and goddesses were campy; and Penelope's suitors were foppish and decadent. 

   Yet as part of the scholarly Nakamichi Baroque Music Festival at UCLA this summer, Mr. McGegan oversaw a museumlike production of a real rarity, Stefano Landi's opera, "Sant' Alessio," designed, directed and even lit in as close an approximation to baroque production styles as is possible. 
Authentic or not, however, Mr. McGegan's irreverence creeps in when he describes the opera's theology as "very repellent," but he says that what makes the opera fun is that "whoever wrote the libretto also decided that too much theology is a bad thing." 

   Mr. McGegan, who also was responsible three years ago for a purely historic production of Handel's "Teseo" at the Boston Early Music Festival and who has done a number of eccentric productions in Long Beach, says he doesn't mind at all going back and forth between such radically different production styles. 
"What is important," he contends, "is that there be room for musical flexibility, and in either case, as long as the director is musical, you can make good jazz." 

   He's not just making metaphor there. 
This is a man who used to enjoy playing "Summertime" on a wooden baroque flute, which he claims is better for glissandi and bending notes than a modern silver instrument. 
Building on that notion, Mr. McGegan has commissioned some Gershwin arrangements as Philharmonia Baroque encores for next season. 

   The same impulse to mix old and new was given free range at Ojai, a gem of a festival held the first weekend of June in an idyllic valley setting near Santa Barbara. 
In past years, Ojai has attracted Stravinsky, Copland and Pierre Boulez as music directors (Mr. 
Boulez will return next June). 
This year, Mr. McGegan provided concerts by his orchestra, which he has turned into the most exciting American period-instrument ensemble in just three years. 
But Mr. McGegan also led modern ensembles in performances of Stravinsky (a hard-driven "Petrushka" but a witty "L'Histoire du Soldat" Suite), and he conferred with Sir Peter Maxwell Davies, who served as the festival's composer-in-residence this year. 

   Mr. Davies's music is theatrical, sometimes outrageously so, and that seems to suit Mr. McGegan just fine. 
When Mr. Davies conducted one of his striking Purcell sendups, which included barrelhouse piano, no one in the audience laughed louder or harder than Mr. McGegan. 
And Mr. McGegan, who doesn't mince words when he dislikes something or someone (he called the countertenor in his recent Long Beach production "awful"), said he was knocked out by Mr. Davies's strangely articulated yet strikingly clear conducting of Beethoven's "Eroica" Symphony. 

   It also is Mr. McGegan's desire to commission new works, and especially something from Mr. Davies, something that will help get his ensemble exposure outside the West Coast. 
Recordings already are doing that somewhat. 
The orchestra has made three thus far for Harmonia Mundi, and the two latest -- one of Vivaldi flute concertos, the other of Handel arias with the counter-tenor Drew Minter -- are both smashing. 
But Mr. McGegan ought to surpass himself with his recording of Handel's "Water Music," coming out in the fall. 
I feel reasonably confident about this because I heard Mr. McGegan conduct this baroque chestnut at a Sunday morning concert here. 
It was the fastest, lustiest rendition I'd ever heard, even though a foul-up on repeats by a couple of players midway through seemed to put the conductor in a bad mood for the rest of the performance. 

   Still, Mr. McGegan's irrepressible sense of humor never leaves him for long. 
He especially brightens up when asked to talk about his recent Hungaroton recording of yet another oddball baroque opera, Telemann's "Geduldige Socrates" ("The Patient Socrates"). 
This madcap four-hour romp could have been written by an 18th-century Mel Brooks, and Mr. McGegan says it has as much appeal for him as Bach, because of Telemann's lighter, more citified sense of humor. 
"Bach's humor is a bit cabbage and potatoes and sauerkraut," he observes. 

   But then, Bach was not an opera composer like Telemann or Handel, and it is to the theatrical that Mr. McGegan seems irresistibly drawn. 
"I don't think I would have liked Bach if I met him actually," he confesses. 
"Handel, on the other hand, must have been a gas." 

   ---
   Mr. Swed is a free-lance music critic based in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
