ID: 231	RANK: 18	SCORE: 13.908775
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870812-0100 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Brahms and 'Figaro' in the Desert
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 08/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Santa Fe, N.M.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   If the hills around here are not alive with the sound of music, it is no fault of the Santa Fe Opera or the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival. 
The opera, founded 31 years ago by John Crosby, is putting on five full-scale productions in its outdoor theater. 
The Chamber Music Festival, in its 15th year, covers the widest imaginable repertory and attracts the cream of the younger generation of musicians. 
Although it does not have the high visibility of the opera, the Chamber Music Festival, because of the high caliber of its participants and the intelligence of its artistic director Alicia Schachter, is in fact the greater of two goods. 

   Sunday's concert began with Beethoven's Trio in E-flat major for violin, cello and piano, which is listed as Opus 1, No. 1 (1793-94), but was by no means the composer's first work. 
It was, however, as Ursula Oppens, the pianist that evening said, "the first piece he was proud of." 
He probably would have been proud to hear the propulsive rendition of it she, Daniel Phillips (violin) and Carter Brey (cello) brought off in the Spanish-colonial-style St. Francis Auditorium. 

   One imagines that Beethoven would have adjusted enthusiastically to the eclectic idiom of the Argentine master Alberto Ginastera's String Quartet No. 1, Opus 20 (1948). 
Here was another breakthrough piece, one that launched him internationally. 
It was followed, after an intermission in the brisk desert air of downtown Santa Fe, by the truly youthful Phantasy Quartet for oboe and strings, Opus 2, composed by Benjamin Britten in 1932 when he was 19. 

   Here was another key early work. 
Britten had, as Harris Goldsmith's program notes informed us, burned many earlier compositions. 
This one put Allan Vogel, principal oboist with the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra, leading the strings (Nicholas Mann, violin; Geraldine Walther, viola; Marcy Rosen, cello) in and out of the virtuoso and undissonant paths where Britten led them. 

   Then, as if on cue, Brahms took the stage, a very mature Brahms, who wrote the Quintet in G major for two violins, two violas and cello, Opus 111, in 1890, at 57. 
Brahms intended the work as a last bow, but its vitality, after so much juvenile high hope on the same program, was the best kind of recommendation for growing old. 
James Buswell, in fine fiddle, led the ensemble with an almost demonic passion. 
In the third movement, he and Mr. Phillips lobbed the theme back and forth to the two female violists, Kim Kashkashian and Ms. Walther. 
Mr. Brey played his cello in the middle like a bemused chaperone. 

   National Public Radio will broadcast the Chamber Music Festival later in the year. 
By now, festival audiences in Santa Fe will have heard the Mendelssohn String Quartet's world-premiere performance of Tobias Picker's "New Memories," commissioned by the festival to commemorate the centennial of Georgia O'Keeffe, who lived and painted for so long at Abiquiu, just a few canyons out of town. 
Tonight and three more times over the next two weeks they will also hear the crossover music of the Argentine Astor Piazzolla and his New Tango Quintet. 
Mr. Piazzolla, his bandoneon (the Argentine accordion) and his group will be appearing at the Central Park Bandshell Labor Day weekend as part of SummerStage's World Music Series, hoping no doubt that their "classical" tango will find an audience already attuned to its folk sources by previous exposure to the traditional, wildly successful review "Tango Argentina." 

   Meanwhile, for the rest of the month, the opera here will carry on with Strauss's "Die Schweigsame Frau," with a static revival of "Madama Butterfly," with a revival of Shostakovich's curiously unmusical staging of Gogol's surreal short story "The Nose" -- and with two productions worth the trouble of getting here via the construction site also known as Albuquerque airport. 

   The big draw this season is Handel's "Ariodante," an Italian opera written for London's Covent Garden in 1735, based on Ariosto's 16th-century Italian epic "Orlando Furioso" and set in a mythical Scotland. 
This cultural and historical mish-mash was tailor-made for the post-modern treatment, which it got, in John Conklin's exaggeratedly neoclassic/Renaissance/romantic set and Michael Stennett's court costumes of all ages between 1500 and 1750. 
This is a long work that marches from set piece to set piece in the standard manner of Handelian "opera seria." 
But impeccable singing by Tatiana Troyanos and Benita Valente, as the hero Ariodante and his betrothed Ginevra respectively, made it easy to stay awake. 
This was a first-class production of an opera almost never seen uncut and fully staged. 

   Of the opera's "Le Nozze di Figaro" it can be said: Everyone on the stage played his part to the hilt. 
The performances sometimes almost cavorted over the edge into slapstick, particularly Edward Crafts as Count Almaviva, but overall it was a joy to see an opera that worked as theater. 
And the broad playing went very far toward making da Ponte's Italian adaptation of Beaumarchais's French play for Viennese audiences in 1786 a comprehensible comedy for English speakers in New Spain. 

   Considered purely as singers, the cast was, typically for Santa Fe, of uneven quality. 
But the Israeli Zehava Gal was a fine Cherubino. 
Kathryn Gamberoni made herself the center of the performance as Susanna, through sheer stage presence and despite a light, although lovely voice. 
Her husband George Manahan conducted the usually humdrum Santa Fe orchestra with great vigor, transforming it into a crisp and accurate instrument. 
One step more and he would have reached the sublime level of the score and challenged the gargantuan lightning bolts visible above and beyond the opera's incomparable site. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
