ID: 231	RANK: 51	SCORE: 12.254232
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881102-0127 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Music: Sounds Like Beethoven... </HL>
<AUTHOR> Terry Trucco </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> London  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It looked like any old performance-day rehearsal at Royal Festival Hall, with musicians dressed in plaid shirts and blue jeans. 
But cameras clicked and tape recorders whirred as the bearded conductor raised his baton and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra responded with 500 bars of music that sounded almost familiar. 

   This was it, the most talked about 18 minutes of music all year, awaited with curiosity, wariness and, in some cases, loathing. 
This was Beethoven's 10th Symphony, or rather, the reconstructed first movement of what is believed to be his 10th Symphony, plucked from his sketchbooks, analyzed from his scribblings and glued together with a few 20th-century additions by Barry Cooper, a music professor at the University of Aberdeen. 

   A bust of Beethoven sat on a ledge behind the orchestra, but Mr. Cooper, pale and professorial, clearly was the rehearsal's star as he adjusted his horn-rimmed spectacles, smiled for photographers and discussed his symphonic reconstruction. 
"Excuse me, I've got to go talk to French television," he told an American newspaper reporter who had snared him for a few minutes following his session with Canadian television. 

   The lights, the cameras and the attention all evoked the Warholian ideal of 15 minutes of fame. 
And some critics think that is precisely what awaits Mr. Cooper's musical jigsaw puzzle. 
"This looks like being a short-lived wonder which will disappear into justified oblivion," sniped a critic for the Daily Telegraph after the movement's recent London debut. 
Others think the Cooper-Beethoven collaboration has a somewhat rosier future. 
Critic Bayan Northcott of the Independent deemed the Beethoven find of "undoubted scholarly probity and real interest with its flashes of authenticity." 

   Then there are the music-world diplomats. 
Snowy-haired conductor Yehudi Menuhin, who attended the London rehearsal, proclaimed the 10th "definitely Beethoven." 
And is it important? 
"That word is used at sales of artworks and gold coins," he said. 
"This is at least as important as that." 

   Beethoven buffs around the world will be able to make up their own minds during the coming months. 
By now, the work has been played in London, Tokyo and New York. 
On Nov. 17 it will be performed in San Jose, Calif. 
And it is already available on CD in the U.S. and Britain, played by the London Symphony Orchestra and accompanied by a lecture by Mr. Cooper. 
MCA-America will release the 10th on cassette in the U.S. this month. 

   Efforts to complete works left unfinished by famous composers have a long and highly undistinguished history, dating from Franz Sussmayr's disastrous attempt, nearly two centuries ago, to complete Mozart's Requiem, which the composer failed to finish before his death. 
The low point probably came in 1928, when a gramophone company proposed a competition to finish off, once and for all, Schubert's Unfinished Symphony. 
Things got so bad that in 1934 the dying Edward Elgar begged that no one be allowed to fiddle with the fragments of his Third Symphony. 
The genre's biggest success probably is Deryck Cooke's 1964 reconstruction of Mahler's 10th Symphony, which, while controversial, has moved permanently into the concert repertory. 

   Considering that legacy, it's no surprise that Mr. Cooper insists he wasn't looking for the mythic 10th Symphony when he chanced upon the strategic sketchbooks. 
True, the 10th had been alluded to by two of Beethoven's secretaries. 
There also was a letter from the impoverished composer shortly before his death in 1827, thanking Britain's Royal Philharmonic Society for its #100 gift and promising it a new symphony. 

   Mr. Cooper was in fact researching a book on Beethoven's working methods and had plowed through some 8,000 pages of the composer's notes five years ago when he recognized the bones of the 10th. 
He pieced them together, writing his own music to fill the gaps. 
This is the part that ruffles many music lovers. 
Critic Bayan Northcott wrote: "For all the movement's Beethovenian drive, too many of Dr. Cooper's details, choices of harmony and partwriting seem prosaic or short-winded, either because the sketches were summary or simply because -- through no fault of his own -- he is not Beethoven." 

   The smooth-haired, 39-year-old Mr. Cooper, who composed his first music at age seven, readily agrees that he isn't Beethoven but asks that the work be looked upon as an "artist's impression" of the first movement. 
"It is probably fairly close to what he had in mind, and is certainly far closer to the elusive 10th Symphony than anything previously heard," he said. 

   He also thinks it offers insights into the direction Beethoven's music might have taken had the composer lived longer. 
He believes Beethoven was looking back to his tremendously productive middle period work, which included the Fourth through Eighth symphonies, as well as forward. 
Structural similarities exist between the 10th and Ninth. 
"And he had not abandoned C Minor," Mr. Cooper concluded triumphantly. 

   A few additional snippets and allusions to other symphonic movements also exist, but apparently not enough to cause excitement -- or consternation, depending on one's sentiments. 
So that should rule out any hopes -- or fears -- for Beethoven's 11th. 

   ---
   Ms. Trucco is a free-lance writer in London. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
