ID: 231	RANK: 71	SCORE: 11.779422
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861201-0100 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
He's Got a Little Liszt
---
By Barrymore Laurence Scherer</HL>
<DD> 12/01/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   When Franz Liszt breathed his last at Bayreuth back in the summer of 1886, having been carried a few days earlier from his sickbed to the Festspielhaus for a complete performance of "Tristan," he was a disappointed man. 

   Certainly he had been lauded as the world's supreme pianist (an opinion he fully shared), but it was as a composer that Liszt strove to make his mark: He wrote music everywhere, reams of it, in railway carriages, hotel rooms, at home and in the homes of others. 
Yet to his continual distress his compositions were regarded with an ambivalent eye. 
No wonder he drank. 

   Therefore, how pleasantly surprised his shade must be at the goings on in his honor during this centennial year of his death, especially in the piano camp. 

   Among the numerous pianists who have been celebrating the Liszt heritage, probably none has been so comprehensive in his approach as Earl Wild, one of the chief Liszt exponents around. 
Having coincidentally turned 70, the perennially youthful Mr. Wild marked this dual jubilee by touring the U.S. and abroad with a series of three Liszt concerts emphasizing the various facets of the composer's piano legacy: Liszt as "Poet," "Transcriber" and "Virtuoso." 

   Now he has recorded this rich store of literature for the Et Cetera label in a three-volume anthology, the first volume of which, "Liszt the Virtuoso" (available on LP, CD or cassette) is now in the shops (with the second two volumes slated for release next year). 
Included here are the B-Minor Sonata and the buoyant Polonaise No. 2 in E-Major, as well as five Transcendental Etudes, four Etudes de Concert, and three Hungarian Rhapsodies. 

   In these sweeping performances Mr. Wild maintains his pre-eminence in the field, blending scholarship and showmanship to achieve power without bombast. 
Moreover, Mr. Wild's lyricism is not merely a matter of touch but of infinitesimal gradations of tempo rubato that impart a remarkable flexibility to the musical statement. 
To paraphrase Wanda Landowska, others play Liszt their way; Mr. Wild plays him Liszt's way. 

   ---
   Of such conductors as Christopher Hogwood and Simon Preston the same might also be said with regard to their interpretations of repertoire of the classical age and earlier periods on original instruments: They play the music (presumably) the composers' way. 
Leading the Academy of Ancient Music, both men have recently produced several interesting recordings of Haydn and his recalcitrant pupil Beethoven. 

   Under Mr. Preston, Haydn's Missa Sanctae Caeciliae on L'Oiseau Lyre -- far less familiar than the same composer's "Nelson" Mass or the "Mass in Time of War" -- emerges clean and well-mannered. 
The musicians play with that bracing, unhomogenized clarity peculiar to original-instrument ensembles. 
The soloists, if unexciting, are equal to their task. 
The boy trebles and male altos of Oxford's Christ Church Cathedral Choir sing like winged cherubim. 

   If everything sounds a bit bloodless, put the blame on Haydn. 
The promise of the dramatic introductory statement of the Kyrie remains unfulfilled by the rest of the score. 

   Mr. Hogwood's Beethoven Symphony cycle on the same label is another story, however, and with the release of the "Eroica" -- a tonic for the senses -- we come another step closer to what I hope will be an eye-opening Ninth. 

   ---
   With the exception of the "Emperor" concerto and a group of bagatelles, Alicia de Larrocha has not recorded much Beethoven until now, but her new (London) boxed set of the five concertos and the Choral Fantasy, op. 80, has been worth the wait. 
Her velvety playing defines Mozart's idea that the piano should sing. 
Listen, for example, to the slow movements of the First and Fourth, and to the soaring piano entry in the opening of the "Emperor." 

   Riccardo Chailly conducts the Radio Symphony Orchestra, Berlin, in surprisingly deft accompaniments. 
I've heard too often his tendency to drive music with the throttle wide open until the melodic material whizzes by faster than the speed of sound itself, as in his reading of Verdi and Rossini overtures. 
Collaborating with an artist of Ms. de Larrocha's intellectual caliber has either given him the opportunity (or forced him) to keep the tempos in line and to create a dialogue between the orchestra and keyboard. 
That, after all, is what the concerto form is all about. 

   ---
   Claudio Abbado is another baton personality who continues to make a splash in the musical world, and while he and the London Symphony Orchestra proffer serious, richly satisfying interpretations of Felix Mendelssohn's five symphonies on Deutsche Grammophon, his reading of Ravel's "Bolero" on the same label is one of the splashiest yet. 

   Let's face facts. 
"Bolero" is surpassed in monotony only by Beethoven's "32 Variations on an Original Theme." 
As if this weren't enough, Ravel even gives a solo line to the saxophone, that repugnant hybrid of clarinet and dyspepsia. 
I admit, however, that "Bolero" is an orchestral showpiece, and that Mr. Abbado throws himself right into things with good humor. 

   The London Symphony horns swoop about like sloe-eyed vamps, the woodwinds play with icy panache, and at the climax, when those brazen tam-tams let forth their thunderous din, Mr. Abbado has all his non-wind players contribute a few full-throated war whoops for good measure (an idea apparently conceived by Toscanini during the NBC Symphony days). 

   Don't, under any circumstances, ignore the other offerings on this program, "Ma Mere l'Oye" and the "Pavane," for they give Mr. Abbado a chance to show his skill at more seductive Ravel scores. 

   ---
   Mr. Scherer is a music critic based in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
