ID: 231	RANK: 74	SCORE: 11.667877
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870603-0151 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- In Concert:
Historic-Performance Hero
---
By Lesley Valdes</HL>
<DD> 06/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Shortly after flinging white socks across the dressing room, Roger Norrington begins to unbutton his turquoise sports shirt. 
In nine minutes the curtain will rise on the English National Opera's "Don Giovanni" at the Coliseum, with Mr. Norrington conducting. 
Yet he rattles on prestissimo about his specialty, historic performance practices, as cavalier about the time as he is about undressing in front of a female reporter. 

   Mr. Norrington is definitely flamboyant, but this 53-year-old Briton is a hero in his own country mainly because of what he does to revitalize 17th- and 18th-century scores with period instruments and performance techniques. 

   Early this spring Mr. Norrington edged forward into the 19th century, performing Beethoven's symphonies here with gutstringed fiddles, tiny but explosive timpani, and wooden-sounding woodwinds. 
The series was a sensation. 
Fortunately for the rest of us, EMI is issuing Mr. Norrington's Beethoven cycle with the London Classical Players. 
Compact disks of Symphonies 2 and 8 are newly out and the Ninth is expected this fall. 

   Next week (June 12, 13) Mr. Norrington will make his U.S. debut at the Boston Early Music Festival directing Americans in a rarely heard version of Haydn's "The Four Seasons." 
It is a scaled down version of the gloriously youthful-sounding oratorio Haydn composed in old age. 
Arranging it for a chamber performance at Esterhazy in 1803, Haydn made numerous changes in the orchestral score, in particular adding woodwinds to fill out the vocal line. 
Because of the small chorus, the soprano, tenor and bass soloists will sing along with the chorus, a practice as old as the Renaissance and continuing until the 19th century. 

   Besides the novelty of an intimate, vividly colored "Seasons," what makes the premiere especially distinctive is its period instrumentation, the "new" sounds of gut strings lightly bowed, of an oboe without metal keys, of a hand-stopped horn's rustic, even raucous charm. 
There will also be the chance to hear 18th-century articulation -- the methods of bowing, beating, tonguing -- that Mr. Norrington and other early-music pros have gleaned from autograph scores and treatises by the violinist-pedagogues Leopold Mozart and Pierre Baillot or Frederick the Great's celebrity flutist, J.J. Quantz. 

   For the premiere, Mr. Norrington is using 35 players and 33 singers, a considerable reduction from the original's orchestra of nearly 200, but with a chorus of equal size. 
He insists that "an awful lot of nonsense is written about numbers in the historical movement. 
In point of fact, by the 18th-century gigantism had arrived. 
Haydn had been terrifically impressed with the huge forces Handel used in Westminster Abbey." 

   Mr. Norrington's point is that reduced forces, pure and simple, don't guarantee correctness or even a period sound. 
For Beethoven, he does limit his orchestra to 50 players, about half as many as a modern orchestra would use, but he is much more concerned with "ratios," with the balance of forces among the sections of the orchestra. 
The importance of ratios becomes exhilaratingly clear in Mr. Norrington's version of Beethoven's Symphonies No. 2 and 8, where the still-predominant but reduced strings allow the middle-voiced winds to shine. 
Nor does the reduced string section sound weak. 
The opening of the Eighth is a knockout, full-bodied and vigorous for nearly nine minutes. 
And in the slenderly scored transitions for strings and bassoon, there's an added rightness to the way these instruments match. 

   One reason Beethoven can sound so solid with fewer instruments is that Mr. Norrington has not reduced the size of the double bass contingent. 
He has six of them, as most modern orchestras would, but they are matched by an otherwise pared-down bevy of smaller strings -- 20 violins, eight violas and six cellos. 
Mr. Norrington points out that 18th-century listeners were accustomed to "all the texture and harmony and humor of the bass. . . . 
And although big orchestras did exist in Beethoven's day, they always used a large bass section." 
Similarly, when there were more than 10 first violins 18th-century leaders doubled the winds. 

   I find the timbres and colors on the EMI disk pleasingly, even shockingly, bright. 
Mr. Norrington and the London Classical Players also, happily, lack the preciousness that marked the original-instrument movement in its early days. 
The LCP sound comfortable with their instruments. 

   Mr. Norrington's rhythmic sense is quite gripping, too, rivaling the drive of even a Karajan or Toscanini. 
The opening allegro of the Eighth, for instance, fairly whizzes along. 
Mr. Norrington argues that Beethoven's tempos are faster than we are used to because of their historical descent from Haydn and Mozart: "Classical symphonies weren't bloody bores, they were entertainments. . . . 
There are no slow movements in classical symphonies." 
Mr. Norrington re-accelerates the minuet movements and returns them, convincingly, to their dance origins (taking the minuet of the Eighth at precisely Beethoven's rapid metronome marking). 
But don't think he's an ogre unable to sing. 
There are sufficiently sensitive phrases, and Mr. Norrington has a nice way with dramatic deceleration. 

   He is not, above all, a pedant bending music to notions picked up in a musicology program. 
Mr. Norrington comes out of the "thoroughly amateur" native British tradition of music making. 
Long after reading English literature at Cambridge, and working for Oxford University Press, he studied a little conducting at the Royal College of Music, "but never took an exam." 
Such independence may have solidified his common-sense approach. 
"Many very great artists are too uncreative to think for themselves, too intimidated by tradition," he says. 
"I used to play that way too. 
I even sang in the chorus under Klemperer, when he was chief conductor of the Philharmonia, and I'd think because he was a great conductor, he had to be right. 
Now the Philharmonia are asking me to do Beethoven. 
And they're really shocked!" 

   ---
   Ms. Valdes is a free-lance writer based in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
