ID: 231	RANK: 76	SCORE: 11.633485
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861217-0108 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Records:
Lend Them Your Ears
---
By Manuela Hoelterhoff</HL>
<DD> 12/17/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Christmas With Kiri" (London). 
Some things go just fine without Kiri te Kanawa. 
Entire operas by Verdi or Puccini. 
But Bambi and Kiri are a match made in heaven. 
This assortment of songs is just what Santa ordered for a little sentimental skating through the season. 
She is an ornament in all. 

   "Pavarotti Anniversary" (London). 
A bundle of arias recorded over the last 15 years with only a few signs of middle-age spread. 
Elvino's bumpkin outfit didn't fit particularly well by the time he recorded Bellini's "La Sonnambula." 
But the demands of the dramatic repertoire are amply met, particularly the Giordano and Boito selections. 
It's thrilling to hear such lambent tone lavished on the poet Chenier's adieu or Faust's nocturnal wanderings through the dewy meadows and quiet streets of pre-concrete Frankfurt. 

   "Fiesta Mexicana" (Deutsche Grammophon). 
A safe gift item. 
Is it likely anybody you want to know has already rushed out to buy a record that has a cover photo of tenor Francisco Araiza with a red bib and silver loops down his legs? 
The Mexican gives us another tour through "Granada" and sings "Besame Mucho" in a brown-sugar voice. 
A mammoth mariachi orchestra keeps the rhythm. 

   "Vienna, City of My Dreams" (Angel). 
Hard to believe Placido Domingo remembers having been here, the schedule being what it is. 
Chicago tonight, London tomorrow, Tokyo for lunch. 
Vienna found him in overdrive, ladling out the schmaltz with a snow scoop. 

   "Romeo et Juliette" (Angel). 
The story is unfolded by the orchestra, with the occasional solo voice and wandering chorus illuminating Verona's drawn-out night. 
Lavish in the contralto solo is Jessye Norman, with tenor John Aler gliding smoothly through Mercutio's mischievous music. 
But the work's mysterious atmosphere is not always conveyed by Riccardo Muti, who hurries the Philadelphia Orchestra and the Westminster Choir through the starlit town. 

   "Don Giovanni" (Deutsche Grammophon). 
Surprisingly, this is Herbert von Karajan's first recording of Mozart's masterwork, and had he only brought some of the Don's libertine charm to his work with the leading ladies, the result might have been a lot less driven and dry. 
Why cast mezzo Agnes Baltsa in the soprano role of Elvira and then rush her around like Speedy the Robot? 
A tight-voiced Anna Tomowa-Sintow isn't heard to advantage either as shrewy Anna. 
But there is Samuel Ramey, whose bass just rolls through the part and connects well with Ferruccio Furlanetto, an entertainingly buffo Leporello. 

   "Missa Solemnis" (Deutsche Grammophon). 
Von Karajan again, leading the Berlin Philharmonic and Vienna Singverein through this aptly named Beethoven solemnity, which he has recorded several times. 
A bit detached -- not a hint of earthly vibrato in the violin solo coursing through the Benedictus. 
But the soloists, in particular Lella Cuberli and Trudeliese Schmidt, sing with great purity, and Mr. von Karajan's taut line brings a hushed quality to a great choral piece. 

   "Hummel Piano Sonatas" (Arabesque). 
Mozart was so taken by little Jan Nepomuk that he took the 7-year-old tot into his house and taught him so well there doesn't seem to have been anyone alive in the early 19th century who didn't think Hummel was a genius. 
His piano playing was compared with Beethoven's; Liszt wanted to study with him but didn't have the money. 
Judging by Ian Hobson's three-volume series of Hummel's piano sonatas, Hummel's contemporaries exaggerated a little. 
But his Sonata No. 5 in F-sharp minor is not a casual item for an afternoon soiree. 
Technically challenging and intellectually lofty, it almost merits Robert Schumann's assessment: "An epic, titanic work." 

   "Schumann's Cello Concerto and Symphony No. 2" (Deutsche Grammophon). 
As cellist Mischa Maisky moves through this often melancholy work, he shows off a fine feeling for its lyricism and phrasing. 
Leonard Bernstein conducts with a flowing hand and together with the Vienna Philharmonic brings a memorable warmth to the symphony's celebrated slow movement. 

   "Mahler's Symphony No. 7" (Deutsche Grammophon). 
There were brief, fleeting moments when Gustav Mahler didn't see death, darkness and despair loitering outside his Carinthian cottage. 
His Seventh is one such extended moment. 
The second of the two glorious Nachtmusik (night music) movements is particularly beguiling in this performance by Mr. Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic. 

   "Sinfonia Antartica" (Angel). 
In 1949, at an age when many composers want to write an opera about King Lear or some transcendental symphony for 5,000 voices, 70-year-old Ralph Vaughan Williams turned to movie music. 
He proved so good at this that one score after another came his way. 
A reworked version of his music for "Scott of the Antarctic," the score expresses all the terror and fascination of the South Pole: Eerie winds, dark nights, nothing for miles. 
Water freezes and ice cracks, until the final chilly scene when the human footstep disappears in a lament of bells, voices and wind machine. 
The account, by Bernard Haitink and the London Philharmonic, is absorbing. 

   "Chamber Music by John Knowles Paine" (Northeastern). 
The worthy Paine (1839-1906), professor of music for years at Harvard and the first American composer of international renown, filled the Northeast with students. 
Lately, his own forgotten pieces are getting a renewed hearing. 
The New York Philharmonic recently played his Symphony No. 2. 
This pleasurable release featuring Joseph Silverstein (violin), Jules Eskin (cello) and Virginia Eskin (piano) suggests there might be an occasional spot on recital programs for a Paine sonata or humoresque. 

   "Copland's Symphony No. 3 and Quiet City" (Deutsche Grammophon). 
Mr. Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic in two contrasting works from Aaron Copland's peak years, around 1940. 
The wide expanses of the ambitiously scaled symphony are miles away from the intimacy of his evocation of a night-darkened town with a lone trumpeter, but both show the composer's ability to describe uniquely American scenes. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
