ID: 231	RANK: 87	SCORE: 11.457190
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870128-0139 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Barenboim's Beethoven
---
By Barrymore Laurence Scherer</HL>
<DD> 01/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The German-born Sir Charles Halle was probably history's first pianist to play the entire cycle of Beethoven sonatas in public -- an "impossible" feat he accomplished in a series of 18 recitals at London's St. James's Hall in 1861. 
While complete Beethoven cycles are no longer rarities nowadays, they still have something of a "Sunday suit" aura about them. 
More than performances, we regard them as intellectual accomplishments. 

   Daniel Barenboim first performed the Beethoven 32 in 1960, while basking in his reputation as a "Wunderkind." 
A quarter century older, and considerably grayer, he concluded his latest venture into the canon (begun last season) with four concerts here at Avery Fisher Hall between mid-November and December. 
Frankly, the results of these final recitals were unsettling, and often infuriating, for Mr. Barenboim's generally misanthropic approach to the music left one with the impression that apart from proving he could still get through the cycle he had no other reason for undertaking it again. 

   Undeniably Mr. Barenboim has a ripsnorting technique. 
In addition, he can play quite beautifully -- when he wants to. 
He can fly through passage work with remarkable accuracy at top speed, an effect that repeatedly achieved its presumed end of getting much of the audience to its feet. 
Great cheers greeted the end of the "Appassionata" and "Les Adieux," regardless of the fact that the thematic material of their respective finales rattled by so quickly as to be nearly unrecognizable. 
There wasn't even accuracy in the rushed passages of the "Pathetique." 
But that didn't cut into the collective euphoria. 
Obviously, express-train virtuosity still thrills 'em, even if they can't quite catch the tune. 

   The excessive speed often reduced the music to a commonplace level of superficiality. 
In such movements as the final Rondo of Sonata No. 9 and the opening Allegro of No. 4 one ought to feel a sense of urgency, of drive. 
Instead, one sensed impatience on Mr. Barenboim's part. 
Frequently the impatience exploded into apparent anger, as the pianist pounded at the keys and pedals like a petulant child. 

   It would also seem that despite his manifold gift for sensitive lyricism, which he displayed to full advantage in the short, Mozartian Op. 49 sonatas and in the Adagio movement of the C-minor sonata, Op. 10 at the same late fall concert, he prefers to strive for the heroic posture, but at the expense of tone. 
Previously I heard this striving in Mr. Barenboim's recording of Liszt's "Annees de Pelerinage," with the same unsatisfying results. 
Heroics are not congenial to him: He does not resound in forte passages so much as clang; instead of Zeus's thunderbolts we get the village blacksmith. 
By racing and pounding the first movement of the Sonata No. 32 (marked Maestoso-Allegro con brio ed appassionato) he produced not heroism, but a tantrum. 

   Mr. Barenboim's performances also raise the question: When does true interpretation cross the line into mere caprice? 
There never seemed to be a logical, musical reason for his exaggerated tempi -- either faster than light or slower than molasses. 
To be sure, his playing of the Adagio movement of the Sonata No. 11 was a masterpiece of fine phrasing (this was in the Dec. 7 concert, the best of the four, and Mr. Barenboim seemed to be in a genial mood that night -- at least his usual sneer was closer to a smile). 
The Adagio of the Sonata No. 17 and the Largo appassionato of the Sonata No. 2 were taffy pulls, however. 
Thematic material was stretched to the point at which it fell apart. 
Where one wanted rubato, as in the Adagio cantabile of the "Pathetique," he gave none, and often muddied the delicate lines by using too much pedal. 
Moreover, sudden, savage shifts of dynamics -- from triple piano in one phrase to triple forte in the next, on one occasion actually causing the entire audience to start -- lent his renditions the overall impression of a mosaic rather than a fully conceived train of thought. 
In short, if a reasonably intelligent person were to have heard these sonatas for the first time in these performances, he might well have received the impression that Beethoven was deaf from birth. 

   What remains most frustrating is that Mr. Barenboim has the ability to produce some of the most velvety pianissimo tones in the keyboard world. 
In this he truly occupies a class of his own. 
Why, therefore, isn't the rest of his playing as beautiful? 
Can it be that he is a miniaturist at heart, forced to play the hero in an overblown world that clamors for big gestures? 
With this in mind I looked forward to Mr. Barenboim's all-Chopin matinee, on Dec. 16, which was to be the first regular concert in the newly restored Carnegie Hall. 
How would all his Beethoven maneuvers affect his Chopin? 
Obviously, rehearsing Chopin did little to mollify Mr. Barenboim's Beethoven. 

   My questions went unanswered. 
Sudden illness resulted in the last-minute substitution of Itzhak Perlman, a change greeted by one patron with the astute comment, "Oh, that's okay; I like violin better than piano." 
Nonetheless, Mr. Perlman proved the ideal artist to reconsecrate the hall to the public at large, and his program was perfect for a brisk yuletide afternoon. 
Apart from the fact that his playing is flawless as ever, his tone rich and emotionally varied, his performance manner relaxed, Mr. Perlman is a charmer of the first water. 
After the intermission, he and his excellent accompanist Jonathan Feldman engaged in a little amusing "stage business" as they chose successive pieces from an immense portfolio. 

   In lieu of a printed program, Mr. Perlman announced each composition from the stage (quite audibly, without amplification), and from the first exquisite notes of Jean-Marie Leclair's Sonata in D through the final measures of Saint-Saens's "Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso," he deservedly held the crowd in the palm of his hand. 
Between were eloquent performances of Brahms's Third Sonata in D-Minor, Gluck's familiar "Melodie," and a perfectly delicious assortment of Fritz Kreisler chestnuts. 
What can one say, except that during Mr. Perlman's recital there was probably no better place on earth to be? 

   ---
   Mr. Scherer is a free-lance music writer based in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
