ID: 237	RANK: 56	SCORE: 14.939946
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870817-0136 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<IN> SASOY DBRSY ANGLY LABOR AFRIC
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)
PETROLEUM (PET) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Black workers at South Africa's diamond mines will vote today on whether to begin a strike, Cyril Ramaphosa, general secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers, or NUM, said. 

   NUM's strike against gold and coal mines has entered its second week. 
It reached its most violent stage Friday, when more than 100 strikers were injured in clashes at two mines. 
Additional strikers were hurt during disturbances Saturday and yesterday. 
In one of the incidents Friday, police fired birdshot, marking the first report since the strike began of police using live ammunition. 

   Mr. Ramaphosa said yesterday that strike leaders have agreed to meet with Anglo American Corp., the country's biggest mining company, to discuss ways of curbing the violence. 

   Although Mr. Ramaphosa said a strike vote for diamond miners was set for today, a spokesman for De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. said that the company had been asked to provide facilities in which a strike vote could be held but that a date hadn't been specified. 
De Beers controls 80% of the world's uncut-diamond market. 

   The company has a labor force of about 9,500 in South Africa, and NUM has about 6,650 members within that group. 

   De Beers said the union has declared on behalf of the diamond miners a wage dispute separate from that involving the gold and coal miners. 
It said a conciliation board was appointed Thursday as the next step in the legal wage-negotiation process. 
South African labor law states that only once wage negotiations have deadlocked at the conciliation-board level can a union call a legal strike. 

   Mr. Ramaphosa said Friday that discussions with platinum mines were continuing. 
Although he said NUM was accepting Anglo American's offer to discuss reducing violence -- which he said would mark the first high-level contact between the two sides since the strike against gold and coal mines began Aug. 9 -- he denied that the union was moderating its demands. 

   "The strike continues until a settlement is reached," Mr. Ramaphosa said. 
He added that workers at more mines would down tools today but didn't elaborate. 

   Earlier, Anglo American itself had said it wasn't willing to reopen wage talks with the miners. 

   On Friday, the independent Labor Monitoring Group, which is made up of university academics, said 334,640 of the 509,784 black workers employed by 59 gold and coal mines that it surveyed were on strike. 

   NUM has said that at least 340,000 gold and coal miners are on strike; the Chamber of Mines says that between 220,000 and 230,000 workers have walked out. 
On Friday, it said that 33 mines were affected. 

   The miners are demanding a 30% wage increase and other improvements in benefits. 
The Chamber of Mines unilaterally implemented wage boosts of between 15% and 23.4% effective July 1, even though negotiations were then deadlocked. 

   The Chamber of Mines says the average black miner earns $285 a month, about one-fifth the average white miner's wage; the union says the monthly salary is $170. 

   NUM said that about 240 people have been injured and more than 200 arrested since the strike began. 

   Anglo American said yesterday that mine guards fired tear gas and rubber bullets at attacking strikers at a gold mine southwest of Johannesburg, injuring 24. 

   On Saturday, Trans Natal Coal Corp. said six miners were slightly injured when security forces fired rubber bullets on the site of its Malta mine. 
The union said more than 20 were hurt. 

   The day before, police said 27 strikers at the Optimum coal mine in eastern Transvaal province were injured when the police fired birdshot and tear-gas grenades into a crowd of about 800. 

   Also on Friday, rubber bullets were fired into crowds of black miners at Anglo American's Western Deep Levels mine, wounding at least 76, mining officials said. 
Anglo American said that more than 700 strikers armed with machetes and gasoline bombs gathered at the mine, in the gold belt west of Johannesburg. 
It said security forces fired on the miners when they advanced on the forces. 

   NUM said the strikers were singing outside their residential hostel when police were called in. 
Mr. Ramaphosa said 78 miners were hurt. 

   "We have moved to a new phase in which the managers are using excessive violence to try and break the strike," said Marcel Golding, NUM's assistant general secretary. 

   The government has so far stayed on the sidelines, but there were signs of increasing concern. 
"Some unions go beyond the limits of reasonable behavior. . . . 
They are getting away with murder," Manpower Minister Piet Du Plessis said. 

   At the Rand Refinery, which processes gold to an internationally acceptable level and is the funnel through which South Africa's gold exports pass, 150 workers who conducted a sympathy strike Thursday returned to work Friday. 
The plant had continued to operate in their absence. 

   Also on Friday, the South African Chemical Workers Industrial Union said its 8,900 workers at Sasol Ltd.'s coal mines and manufacturing plants will strike today because talks are deadlocked over the union's demands that May 1, the traditional Labor Day, and June 16, the anniversary of the 1976 Soweto riots, be made paid holidays. 
The union represents about 64% of the labor force at Sasol, which is South Africa's biggest producer of oil from coal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
