ID: 237	RANK: 97	SCORE: 12.780428
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890907-0079 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890907 </DD>
<AN> 890907-0079. </AN>
<HL> Prospects Grow Dim
@  For Free Diamonds
@  In Arkansas Hills
@  ---
@  Commercial Interests Want
@  To Stake Claims in a Park
@  Where Hobbyists Dig
@  ----
@  By Marj Charlier
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 09/07/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<IN> PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN>
<DATELINE> MURFREESBORO, Ark.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   At 6 a.m., when many retirees awake for a day of fishing, James Archer pulls on his yellow waders and pushes a tattered straw hat down over his wiry black hair. 
He drives a dozen miles to a state park and pays $3 to enter. 

   Mr. Archer doesn't fish, though. 
He digs for diamonds, along with a dozen or so other regular prospectors and a stream of tourists, in a 30-acre field the state plows for amateur diggers. 
Crater of Diamonds State Park, in the rolling hills of southwest Arkansas, is the only place in the U.S. where significant numbers of the stones have been found. 

   Mr. Archer spends eight to 10 hours in the field every day. 
"You know how some people get hooked on drugs?" he says. 
"This thing got me hooked." 

   The 64-year-old former lumberman digs pails of dirt from deep holes, carries them with a handmade yoke to a big pan of water, washes out the clay and soil and sorts through the stones for diamonds. 
Usually, in a week he will find two or three diamonds, averaging about 0.25 carat each. 

   Like the other regular diggers, Mr. Archer sells his diamonds to tourists and local jewelers for $200 to $1,000 a carat, depending on the size and color of the stones. 
He has found about 200 carats, and although he won't say how much money he has earned, it hasn't been much for 13 years of backbreaking labor. 
But money isn't why he comes to the park. 

   "It's a hobby," he says. 
"If I stayed at home, I'd be looking at the walls." 

   That may happen soon. 
With diamond prices rising, mining companies have set their sights on the park. 
They have obtained permission to test it for commercial potential, and this drilling is expected to begin early next year. 
The prospect of towering excavating equipment and earth movers replacing picks and shovels has the diggers upset, environmentalists furious and local businesses that depend on the park's modest draw worried. 

   "They ought to leave it alone. 
There's no other place in the world like it," says Chester Guest, who spends all his vacations digging for diamonds at the park. 
"We'd like to see it here for Sonja's kids," he says, pointing to his 13-year-old daughter. 

   Mining companies, however, maintain that the park isn't living up to its economic potential. 
Attendance has dropped over the past few years, and the state doesn't reap any tax dollars from the miners' meager discoveries. 
A commercial mine would provide a windfall of tax revenue and transform the park into a tourist mecca, claims Carrick Patterson, a spokesman for Arkansas Diamond Development Corp., one of several interested companies. 
"We believe people would flock to this thing," he says. 

   Such promises of prosperity are seductive here in Pike County, one of the poorest regions in America. 
With per capita income in the county 67% of the national average, the prospect of new jobs and more tourist dollars has provided the mining companies with a powerful argument. 

   The main existing local industries -- timber harvesting and poultry processing -- pay lower wages than the diamond companies promise. 
"This is a place where husband and wife can both work and starve at the same time," says James A. O'Neal Jr., a local justice of the peace and an X-ray technician at the county hospital. 
The diamond mine "would be a way out of poverty for a number of people," he believes. 

   But many local businesses that depend on tourism aren't convinced. 
They argue that a commercial mine might get played out in a few years. 
And they fear that many tourists who trek here for the tantalizing prospect of finding a diamond in the field will take their vacations elsewhere. 

   As for the notion that tourists would delight at the sight of giant scoops and bulldozers tearing up the park, Jane Terrell, owner of the local Queen of Diamonds Inn, says that makes about as much sense as getting a thrill out of watching a professional gambler placing bets at the race track. 
"It just can't match the experience of doing it yourself," she says. 

   Environmentalists, meanwhile, worry that the approval of testing here indicates other parks aren't safe from conversion to commercial use. 
Regional officials of the U.S. Interior Department had prohibited commercial testing because federal funds were used to develop the park; as a condition for obtaining the funds, the state had promised not to convert it to other uses. 
But department officials in Washington reversed that decision after a visit from some Arkansas Diamond lobbyists. 

   Ironically, the controversy over mining has brought 25% more visitors to the park this summer, says Jim Cannon, superintendent. 
About 80,000 tourists are expected this year. 
But if history is any guide, only about 1,000 diamonds will be found, and more than half of those will be unearthed by the handful of regular diggers like Mr. Archer. 

   The odds don't bother Joan Derryberry, a Tyler, Texas, teacher who pounds at the clay with a spare-tire tool, near a sign marking the spot where another Texan found a 16-carat diamond in 1975. 
"I don't think people find that many diamonds here," she says. 
"It's just for fun." 

   Other tourists stop to ask a mud-splattered Mr. Archer endless questions. 
He obligingly digs in a small pouch at his waist and pulls out about a dozen plastic boxes, each holding a small diamond nestled on cotton. 
He spreads the treasures out on his palm and knotted fingers. 

   The diamonds, rounded and ranging in color from white to dark bronze, don't look like the cut and polished gems that rest regally in engagement rings. 
Still, the tiny stones shine with the unmistakable glow of crystallized carbon, and they elicit oohs and ahs from the children. 

   Across the field, Raymond Schall holds court with a group of youngsters. 
Dressed in a pink striped shirt and green herringbone pants, the lanky 84-year-old leans on a cane he made from an old pool cue. 
He pulls a picture out of his pocket, his clear eyes shining with pride. 
It shows his biggest find, a 6.07-carat diamond he found in 1981 and sold for $15,000. 

   He was a digger then, but he found this diamond lying on the ground. 
He fell on it, speechless in his excitement, clutching it in his fist. 
His fellow diggers at first feared Mr. Schall had suffered a heart attack. 

   Now, too old to dig anymore, he walks the field daily, knocking clods of dirt over with his cane, occasionally finding a small diamond. 
"If I don't find a diamond in an hour or two, I give up," he says. 

   Mr. Archer muses over his friend's fate. 
"What else would he do if he didn't come out here? 
He'd be crazy. 
He'd fall over dead." 

   Under the trees at the far end of the field, Mr. Guest, a 47-year-old Tulsa sheetmetal shop owner, has set up washing apparatus he made for his twice-yearly vacation diamond dig. 
The washing is hard work -- sweaty, muddy and buggy. 
For all that, the Guests have found about 45 diamonds in 10 years. 
They say they come to get away from the telephone. 
Sonja, wise for her 13 years, has another theory: "It's a place where grown-ups can be little kids again and play in the dirt." 

   Not all the diggers are so friendly. 
Al Scifres, a regular for three years, doesn't talk to tourists. 
Even the other regular diggers find him a little scary. 
As mining-company employees escort a visitor through the field, Mr. Scifres yells at them. 
If commercial mining starts, he pledges, he will die and come back as a ghost. 
"All your machinery will be destroyed and you won't know who did it," he threatens, as tourists give him a wide berth. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
