ID: 148	RANK: 33	SCORE: 12.367761
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871211-0076 </DOCNO>
<HL> Bond Firm Says
Indicted Aide
Took a Leave
---
Goldberg Also Quits Board
Of Matthews & Wright;
His Defense Effort Cited
---
By Ken Wells
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MW FREST WNEWS
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Arthur Abba Goldberg has taken a "voluntary leave of absence" from his position as executive vice president of Matthews &amp; Wright Group Inc. after his indictment by a Guam federal grand jury on charges of bribery, fraud and obstruction of justice, the company said. 

   The Wall Street bond concern also said Mr. Goldberg resigned as a director of the firm and its units and plans to "devote full time and effort to the defense of his case." 

   Mr. Goldberg, known on Wall Street as "Abba Dabba Do" for his aggressive deal-making, couldn't be reached for comment. 
But his attorney, Stanley S. Arkin, called the 52-count indictment against the 46-year-old Mr. Goldberg "factually and legally baseless." 
Mr. Arkin said Mr. Goldberg will plead not guilty to the charges at an arraignment on Guam during the week of Jan. 18. 

   Mr. Arkin also said the bribery charges against Mr. Goldberg, related to an alleged $70,000 campaign payoff to Guam's former Gov. Ricardo Bordallo in 1986, are "ludicrous" because Mr. Bordallo already has been tried and acquitted of related charges. 
Mr. Bordallo earlier this year was tried and acquitted of bribery charges related to payoffs but was convicted on unrelated bribery and extortion charges in connection with business on Guam. 

   The indictments by the Guam grand jury Wednesday included allegations that Mr. Goldberg and Frederick L. Mann, a former Matthews &amp; Wright consultant, masterminded an effort to win Mr. Bordallo's support for a $300 million Guam housing bond, which netted Matthews &amp; Wright huge fees but has yet to produce any houses. 
The indictments charge that the men undertook an intricate scheme in which they secretly funneled money -- some of it from a Guam government account -- into Mr. Bordallo's unsuccessful re-election campaign in exchange for the governor's backing of the bond issue. 

   Mr. Mann, president of J.D. Moore &amp; Co., a Toronto investment concern, called the charges against him a "manufactured situation" and accused Guam U.S. Attorney William O'Connor of "self-aggrandizement" in his handling of the investigation. 
Mr. Mann said that proof of that "self-aggrandizement" was the omission of Matthews &amp; Wright itself and its chief executive officer, George Benoit, in any indictments even though both had "full knowledge" of the Guam and other Pacific island bond issues under investigation. 
Mr. O'Connor couldn't be reached for comment. 

   Mr. Mann declined to say whether he would voluntarily surrender to U.S. authorities, and he wouldn't discuss other aspects of the case. 
A federal judge on Guam has ordered the Federal Bureau of Investigation to arrest Mr. Mann, a Canadian citizen, "wherever they find him" and hold him under $1 million bail. 

   Mr. Mann was convicted in 1984 of swindling a dying widow and longtime family friend of $65,000, Toronto court records show. 
Though Mr. Mann acknowledges the conviction, he said that it had been misrepresented by the press and he vowed to take legal action against those who have "misquoted or given a slanted version of the events." 
For that conviction, he was sentenced to three years in prison, according to Toronto court records. 

   Matthews &amp; Wright declined to comment on the indictment of Messrs. 
Goldberg and Mann. 
The company, in a prepared statement, said it "fully cooperated" in the Guam grand jury investigation, adding that "we think it is significant to note that neither the company" nor employees except Mr. Goldberg and the company's former consultant, Mr. Mann, were charged in the indictments. 
Matthews &amp; Wright added that the indictments were "limited to alleged unauthorized actions" of Messrs. 
Goldberg and Mann. 

   "We continue to believe that the company has conducted business in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and that all underwritings were properly handled," the statement said. 

   The Guam grand jury, however, named several Matthews &amp; Wright officials, including Mr. Benoit and Roger Burns, its chief financial officer, as "relevant" to a far-flung Matthews &amp; Wright scheme that the grand jury said essentially allowed the company to fake $2 billion in so-called arbitrage bond sales to beat a federal tax deadline that made such transactions illegal. 

   The indictments allege that through a shell Saipan bank controlled by Mr. Mann and through a New Jersey credit union controlled by Mr. Goldberg, Matthews &amp; Wright manufactured a series of "bogus transactions" that made it appear that certain bond issues had been sold when they hadn't. 
In at least one case, Messrs. 
Benoit and Burns signed "bogus checks" that were part of the ruse, the indictments state. 

   The indictments also state that Edward K. Strauss, a Pittsburgh attorney, "helped the defendants" in part of their bond scheme by issuing a favorable tax-opinion letter on a certain Matthews &amp; Wright bond transaction, despite knowledge that the IRS had expressed "serious concern" about the issue's tax-exempt status. 
Efforts to reach Matthews &amp; Wright officials for further comment were unsuccessful. 
Mr. Strauss, who wasn't indicted, was said by his office to be traveling and unavailable for comment. 

   As many as 20 Matthews &amp; Wright arbitrage bond issues, representing perhaps $3 billion, are under a federal criminal investigation. 
Under a form of arbitrage that now is largely outlawed by Congress, proceeds from low-yielding tax-exempt municipal issues could be invested at a profit in higher-paying instruments, such as Treasury bills, until the proceeds were needed for projects. 
The issues were popular because they allowed underwriters to collect fees and municipalities to reap arbitrage profits, regardless of whether projects were ever built. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
