ID: 148	RANK: 42	SCORE: 11.562214
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870728-0068 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Investigating Bribery Allegations
Against Matthews &amp; Wright Bond Unit
---
By Ken Wells
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MW
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Federal authorities are now investigating allegations that Matthews &amp; Wright Group Inc.'s municipal bond subsidiary systematically made hundreds of thousands of dollars in illegal payments to certain public officials to influence them to approve a number of questionable bond issues. 

   The authorities also are investigating the allegedly fraudulent inflating of Matthews &amp; Wright's stock because of its earnings from fees generated in the bond issues, which the company underwrote. 

   Officials at the Federal Bureau of Investigation and various U.S. attorney's offices said they are probing complaints by businessmen in the various locations that the municipal bond unit bribed officials to help win approval of the bond issues, which already are being studied by federal regulators for their tax-exempt status. 

   The investigators are focusing on a $300 million issue for Guam; an $80 million issue for its neighboring island, Saipan; and two issues totaling $350 million for East St. Louis, Ill. 
Investigators said other issues underwritten by the subsidiary, known as Matthews &amp; Wright Inc., may also be involved. 

   In a class-action suit filed against Matthews &amp; Wright last month in U.S. District Court in Philadelphia, investors alleged, among other things, that a former $20,000-a-year assistant solicitor for the city of Chester, Pa., had received a $350,000 fee as "special counsel" to the underwriter for a $335 million bond issue there. 
The suit charged that the former official was "instrumental" in getting Matthews &amp; Wright selected as the sole underwriter for the bond issue. 

   In some cases, the payment of bribes together with high-pressure tactics were the company's "modus operandi," said an FBI agent familiar with the case. 

   Separately, federal law enforcement officials are also seeking to determine whether Matthews &amp; Wright violated federal securities laws in connection with the company's initial public offering of stock in 1986. 
The focus of the inquiry is whether an avalanche of questionable tax-exempt bond sales, including the Guam, Saipan and East St. Louis issues, were part of a ploy to fatten earnings through fees, and thus pump up the value of Matthews &amp; Wright shares, at the time of the public offering in August 1986. 

   Officials of New York-based Matthews &amp; Wright didn't return repeated phone calls seeking comment. 

   Matthews &amp; Wright went public with 1.5 million shares at $11 a share, and its stock has traded as high as $13.58. 
However, the company's shares have sunk following reports of investigations that could lead to a challenge of the tax-exempt status of dozens of Matthews &amp; Wright bond issues. 
The company's shares closed yesterday at $3, down 12.5 cents, in American Stock Exchange trading. 

   Those issues are among as many as 100 municipal issues, involving as much as $12 billion, that appear to have been rushed to completion by Matthews &amp; Wright and other firms in advance of 1986 federal tax legislation greatly restricting the practice of "arbitraging" bonds. 
In such situations, the issuers of the bonds, while deciding how and when to use the proceeds for the intended public works projects, invest them at a rate higher than the low rate they paid to borrow the funds, thus earning a profit on the difference in interest rates. 

   Investigators are probing charges, brought in at least one investor lawsuit, that some of those issues were merely sham transactions to beat the arbitrage deadline of Aug. 31, 1986. 

   In other cases, investigators are probing complaints that underwriters vastly inflated project needs under the bond issues, reaping enormous fees in the process. 
As previously reported, federal regulators are believed to be investigating whether the bond sales actually were completed in time to meet a tax-exemption deadline, and whether the projects to be financed were ever economically viable. 
The size of bond issues generally are reached by agreement of the municipalities and underwriters, usually after some sort of study of the need for the project to be financed. 

   At the same time, many of the issues are structured so that the bond proceeds are locked into escrow accounts and away from developers who were depending on them for payment. 
The developers would then have to find their own interim financing. 
In some cases, the proceeds in escrow were invested in annuities designed to protect the bond investors should the projects be scrapped. 

   "The idea was to generate fees. 
There weren't supposed to be any projects," said one federal investigator familiar with the case. 

   In the case of Matthews &amp; Wright, the Guam and Saipan issues alone, for example, earned the company fees of about $20 million. 
Yet governments on both islands are now pessimistic that the projects, to provide low-income and moderate-income housing, will ever be built, largely because of financing problems encountered by project contractors who expected to be paid through the bond proceeds. 

   Guam business officials, who played some part in formulating project estimates with the public officials and Matthews, now estimate that Guam's foreseeable housing needs are probably less than half the 3,700 units proposed for construction under the $300 million bond sale. 
On Saipan, local contractors say that island's housing needs could be met for about a tenth of the $80 million bond issue. 

   The governments of Guam and Saipan, both U.S. trust territories, have launched their own investigations of the issues and say they are considering filing lawsuits to rescind the bonds and recover underwriting fees. 
Eric Smith, an assistant Saipan attorney general, said the local government also may pursue an investigation of possible collusion among local officials and Matthews. 

   Matthews &amp; Wright also handled a $300 million industrial bond issue for the Pacific island of Palau. 
That issue, which also is under federal scrutiny, is in limbo. 

   "Let's put it this way," said a federal official close to the investigation. 
"Palau has 7,000 people, its government is on the brink of bankruptcy and its cash crop is marijuana. 
You tell me how they were going to spend $300 million." 

   In their investigation of alleged bribes, investigators are known to be focusing on the roles of Arthur Abba Goldberg, Matthews &amp; Wright's 45-year-old executive vice president, and Frederick Mann, who is identified in court documents as Matthews &amp; Wright's "authorized representative." 

   In U.S. District Court in Guam, Mr. Goldberg is named in recent court documents as having authorized Mr. Mann to channel $70,000 to the campaign of former Guam Gov. Ricardo J. Bordallo in exchange for Mr. Bordallo's approval of the $300 million Guam bond issue. 

   Messrs. 
Goldberg and Mann were identified in an affidavit filed in support of a guilty plea by John Gilliam, an aide to Mr. Bordallo, to a wire fraud charge in connection with the payoffs. 
Mr. Bordallo, however, earlier this year was acquitted of five counts of bribery related to the Matthews &amp; Wright money. 
He was found guilty in federal court of other, unrelated bribery and extortion charges in connection with business on Guam. 
He was defeated for re-election last November and is appealing his conviction. 

   Mr. Mann is president of J.D. Moore &amp; Co., a Toronto, Canada, investment concern. 
Mr. Mann, according to records obtained from Saipan's office of corporations, controls Commercial Bank of the Americas, an offshore bank on Saipan through which hundreds of millions of dollars of Matthews &amp; Wright bond proceeds flowed. 

   However, the records show that the government declined to renew Mr. Mann's banking license in 1985 after officials learned that he had failed to reveal an April 1984 fraud conviction in Canada. 

   Federal investigators now say they believe several other unnamed Guam and Saipan officials accepted cash, bogus loans or payments for questionable consulting contracts in exchange for giving their approval to the Matthews &amp; Wright bond issues. 
Investigators are also known to be looking into similar allegations against at least one public official in the East St. Louis bond issue. 

   Authorities investigating the Matthews &amp; Wright bond issues have rejected any nationwide task force, despite the geographical breadth of the issues in question. 
U.S. attorneys' offices and companion agencies in at least six locations, including Washington, D.C., New York and Philadelphia, are conducting separate but closely linked investigations, federal agents and officials said. 

   William O'Connor, U.S. attorney for the Pacific island region, declined to comment except to say that separate grand juries on Guam and Saipan would be empaneled to investigate the allegations. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
