ID: 148	RANK: 57	SCORE: 10.565288
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870626-0126 </DOCNO>
<HL> 'Invasion' Appears in Store for Saipan
As U.S. Probes Corruption Allegations
---
By Ken Wells
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/26/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<DATELINE> SAIPAN  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Marines stormed ashore here in 1944, and another invasion seems in store this summer. 

   The U.S. government, fresh from winning corruption convictions of a former governor and several officials on nearby Guam, now is mounting an attack on alleged widespread public corruption, white-collar crime and drug trafficking on Saipan. 

   William H. Millard, a highly visible millionaire, has become that investigation's most prominent witness. 
But he wasn't the first, and he is only one of a score or more of Saipan citizens who have been cooperating with the U.S. investigation, says William O'Connor, the Guam-based U.S. attorney for the region. 

   Mr. O'Connor says the investigation involves elected and appointed officials at several levels here, but he wouldn't be more specific. 
He has hired an assistant prosecutor with significant experience in public-racketeering investigations and will assign him full time to supervise a federal grand jury to be empaneled on the island this summer. 

   The Federal Bureau of Investigation says it is focusing on perhaps a dozen areas of inquiry. 
These include persistent reports that certain commonwealth officials have routinely extorted a "fee" -- said to range up to $500,000 -- from Asian businessmen seeking to undertake commercial ventures here. 

   Such reports don't seem to excite people on this 96-square-mile island. 
"School kids here know about these things," says John R. Wilson, a Saipan building contractor who has lived here most of his life. 
Says Tony Guerrero, a past president of the Saipan Chamber of Commerce: "This will be no different than Guam. 
There are a lot of worried faces in the government." 
Mr. Guerrero is one of Saipan's demographically and politically dominant Micronesians -- known as Chamorros, as they were dubbed by the 16th-century Spanish colonizers of the island. 

   Today Saipan has the charm of Hawaii 40 years ago, the insular politics of smalltown America and the feel of a foreign country. 
It is the main island in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, whose government says it welcomes a federal investigation and intends to begin one of its own. 
"If there is corruption here, it should be addressed," says Gov. Pedro P. Tenorio. 

   Some here suggest that if a number of commonwealth officials have come to view government as a road to riches, the explanation lies partly in Saipan's own sense of isolation and its calamitous past. 

   Though American soil, Saipan is only three hours by jet from Tokyo. 
Japanese tourists outnumber Americans 90 to 1, and Japanese hotels and investments dominate the beach front and the economy. 

   The native community is bonded both by family ties -- virtually everyone is related by blood or marriage -- and by a long history of meddlesome interlopers. 
Magellan colonized the Marianas in the 1500s, mandating Christianity and providing a major ingredient in the modern Chamorro language, a mixture of Micronesian, Spanish, Japanese and English. (The Chamorros, a name derived from a Spanish place name, also speak English.) 

   The Germans briefly ruled the island, but after World War I it passed to the Japanese, who farmed it. 
The Americans took Saipan in a bloody World War II fight that cost 30,000 lives. 
It was from Saipan's neighboring island of Tinian that the Enola Gay took off for the atomic-bomb mission over Hiroshima. 

   The Chamorros have only recently begun to regain firm control of their affairs. 
It was only last November that Saipan and 13 other islands, after four decades as a postwar U.S. trust, obtained commonwealth status. 
Under that arrangement, which was more than a decade in the making, the commonwealth cedes defense and diplomatic matters to the U.S. in exchange for about $35 million annually in U.S. aid and the right to decide most internal matters. 

   During that long postwar transition, suggests Galen Mack, a Saipan business consultant, some politicians here began to assume that the U.S. government, since it clearly intended to cede internal matters to the islanders, no longer much cared what went on here. 

   "There are some who assumed that the end of the trust meant the end of federal influence here," Mr. Mack says. 
"They thought they would be absolutely immune." 

   Ray Riley, an attorney for the commonwealth, notes that while the commonwealth has adopted most of the U.S. Constitution and federal code, there are differences. 
Abortion, for example, is illegal here while prostitution is legal -- and some principles of U.S. law governing official corruption, Mr. Riley says, may not apply. 

   "What may be illegal in Guam and in California," he says, "may not be illegal in the commonwealth." 

   Replies Mr. O'Connor, the Guam federal attorney: "I don't think the argument has merit." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
