ID: 148	RANK: 66	SCORE: 10.077881
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870901-0009 </DOCNO>
<HL> Tiny Matthews &amp; Wright Is Center of Big Litigation
---
Bond House Reaped Not Only Large
Profits but a Legal Whirlwind
---
By Ken Wells
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TAXES MW
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN>
<DATELINE> GUAM  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In early 1985, when Frederick L. Mann began visiting this remote speck of America to persuade Guam to issue a $300 million housing bond, he introduced himself as Dr. Mann. 
The German native, a representative of Matthews &amp; Wright Inc., carried himself like an aristocrat and spoke with sophistication about high finance. 

   "Fred was impressive, unquestionably knowledgeable," recalls Woodrow Gaspard, a Guam building contractor. 

   Unknown to Mr. Gaspard and others here, Mr. Mann's doctoral degree in finance came from a Canadian diploma mill, and he was also a felon. 
In 1984, he had been convicted of swindling Edith Adler, a dying, cancer-afflicted widow and friend, out of $65,000, according to records in York Judicial District Criminal Court in Toronto, where a prosecutor had asked: "You really have no shame, do you, Mr. Mann?" 

   Some have asked the same question of Matthews &amp; Wright, the tiny New York bond house. 
Federal district court documents here say Matthews Executive Vice President Arthur Abba Goldberg authorized Mr. Mann, his friend since 1983, to help the firm ensure passage of the Guam bond. 
To do so, Mr. Mann channeled $70,000 in illegal contributions to the campaign of a former Guam governor in exchange for his approval of the Guam issue, according to an affidavit filed in U.S. District Court here by John Gilliam, a onetime aide to the governor. 
The affidavit was introduced into court in support of Mr. Gilliam's guilty plea to a wire-fraud charge in connection with the payments, court records show. 

   The Guam issue is one of more than 20 Matthews &amp; Wright issues, totaling about $3 billion, being investigated by federal authorities on the suspicion that they were sham transactions, many of them wired together with deceit, fraud and payoffs, federal investigators said in interviews. 

   The bond sales reaped the company tens of millions of dollars in fees and helped make a success of its initial public offering last year. 
In the process, some of the poorest municipalities in America were duped and defrauded, these investigators and a growing number of lawsuits allege. 

   Both Guam and the nearby island of Saipan have sued Matthews &amp; Wright for $350 million in punitive damages for fraud in the firm's handling of separate issues there. 
The suits were filed in the federal district courts in the respective islands. 
Investors who bought parts of a $330 million Chester, Pa., issue and a $233 million East St. Louis, Ill., issue have accused Matthews &amp; Wright of concocting phony transactions in racketeering suits filed in Pennsylvania and Arizona federal district courts. 

   In some cases, investigators and lawsuits allege, the underwriter created phony sales to beat a federal tax deadline, in others coaxed municipalities into floating projects so huge and unrealistic that they were never viable, and attracted builders to add an air of legitimacy to projects that Matthews &amp; Wright knew had little chance of being completed. 

   Thus, few if any of the houses, recycling centers and ports to be built from these issues have materialized. 
But there is wreckage everywhere: contractors driven to bankruptcy, public officials suspected of corruption and the possibility that some governments that dealt with Matthews &amp; Wright might find it difficult to enter the credit markets again. 

   A key element is the nature of the bonds: so-called collapsible issues that automatically "collapse," or are called for redemption, after a period, typically three to five years, if projects aren't substantially completed within that time. 

   The bonds themselves provided no financing to get projects off the ground. 
Rather the money was locked away in interest-bearing accounts, typically annuities, and wouldn't be available until the interim three-year to five-year financing was arranged. 
That was a stumbling block that was little understood among some of Matthews &amp; Wright's issuers and overlooked completely on the island of Saipan, which floated an $80 million Matthews &amp; Wright underwritten housing bond. 

   Thus localities or contractors with limited skills and few resources were left to raise huge amounts of money and told in most cases by Matthews &amp; Wright that such financing could easily be obtained, federal investigators say. 
On Guam, for instance, a consortium of local contractors suddenly found themselves scrambling to put together interim financing on a $300 million undertaking that had to be largely completed within three years: this, on an island that has three small banks and a branch of Chase Manhattan. 

   "We were eaten alive," says Guam's Mr. Gaspard, the consortium's leader. 
Both Guam and Saipan, whose issues have produced no projects to date, were the first issuers to sue Matthews &amp; Wright for fraud. 
They seek $350 million in punitive damages and return of underwriting fees in suits filed in the federal district courts in their respective islands. 

   Even in the few instances where municipalities said projects appeared to be viable -- a $433 million river-front development for East St. Louis, for example -- suspicion that Matthews &amp; Wright faked the bond sales has cast doubt on the tax-exempt status of those bonds and hurled the projects into limbo. 

   "We came to Wall Street with legitimate intentions," says Artis Talley, a former city official who helped coordinate East St. Louis's bond efforts. 
"But when we got there, little known to us, we were in the hands of a bunch of greedy sharks." 

   Behind the affair appears to be a story of personal and corporate ambition. 
Its author is said to be the bearded, energetic 46-year-old Mr. Goldberg, a one-time civil rights activist and former assistant New Jersey attorney general who in recent times had channeled his passions into making money. 

   Matthews &amp; Wright was founded by Mr. Goldberg and Chairman George Benoit in 1968. 
There is no Matthews or Wright. 
The name, company insiders say, is a creation of its founders. 
Until 1985, Matthews &amp; Wright was a small bond firm struggling to drum up business on the fringes of the municipal bond market. 

   A change in federal tax laws governing the issuance of so-called arbitrage bonds and a bold bid by Mr. Goldberg to turn Matthews &amp; Wright into a publicly held high-flyer, would change all that. 

   Mr. Goldberg -- known on Wall Street as "Abba Dabba Do" for his aggressive dealmaking -- ran the municipal finance side of Matthews &amp; Wright, whose results traditionally lagged the bond trading side run by Mr. Benoit. 
"Arthur is intensely competitive. 
So this plan was going to be his turn to shine," says a former Matthews &amp; Wright employee. 

   Instead, former employees and federal investigators say, Mr. Goldberg led his firm on a binge that may shake out into the largest municipal bond fraud in history and whose lasting legacy may be tougher regulation of the largely unregulated municipal bond market. 

   Federal investigators say Mr. Mann and Mr. Goldberg will be asked to return to Guam this fall, this time via subpoena. 
A Guam grand jury, investigating a list of suspected criminal activity, including tax fraud, wire fraud, bank fraud, obstruction of justice and securities fraud, may deliver its report in a matter of weeks, federal officials close to that inquiry say. 
Federal investigators say the grand jury here is delving into evidence that another government official got a $200,000 payoff in connection with the Matthews &amp; Wright issue here. 

   And at least half of six other federal court jurisdictions that are conducting or plan to launch grand jury investigations of Matthews &amp; Wright are investigating evidence that the firm made payoffs, often in the form of bogus loans or consulting contracts, to win approval for bond issues, federal authorities say. 
They also say they are investigating complaints that Matthews &amp; Wright in some cases used intimidation or bribery attempts to silence building contractors who had threatened to blow the whistle on what they considered to be fraudulent Matthews &amp; Wright bond practices. 

   TechniCo-op Inc., a Bridgeport, Conn., contractor, has sued Matthews &amp; Wright and others in a New York state court for breach of contract, charging that the underwriter abetted TechniCo-op's dismissal from an East St. Louis project because it protested Matthews &amp; Wright's handling of bond issues there. 
Matthews &amp; Wright has countersued for malicious prosecution, a spokesman for the contractor said. 

   Matthews &amp; Wright, Mr. Goldberg and Mr. Benoit have consistently declined to comment, though a spokesman for the company previously denied that it had engaged in illegal activity. 
Mr. Mann, president of J.D. Moore &amp; Co., a Toronto investment firm, also didn't return repeated phone calls. 

   As previously reported, the Matthews &amp; Wright issues are part of a wider investigation, involving another half-dozen underwriters and an additional $9 billion in municipal debt, into the use of arbitrage bonds. 
Arbitrage is a controversial form of municipal financing that allows issuers to profitably invest proceeds from low-yielding, tax-exempt issues into higher-yielding instruments until projects get off the ground, typically three to five years later. 

   That profit became a lure itself, in some cases prompting cities to sponsor bond projects they had no intention of building just to reap arbitrage income. 
Abuses led Congress in 1985 to impose severe restrictions on the practice in two stages, setting off a stampede of last-minute filings in December 1985 and August 1986. 

   Outside of the Matthews &amp; Wright issues, however, federal investigators say their focus is rather narrow: Did underwriters -- in complicity with cities -- hastily cook up bogus projects to snare last chance arbitrage profits for cities and fat fees for themselves? 
Those allegations, if proved, are serious, since they could lead to an Internal Revenue Service challenge of the tax-exempt status of the bond issues. 

   Matthews &amp; Wright took the scheme further, using the New American Credit Union of Jersey City, N.J., controlled, a federal investigator said, by Mr. Goldberg, and the Commercial Bank of the Americas on Saipan, controlled by Mr. Mann, to give the illusion that some of its issues had been sold in advance of the arbitrage deadlines, both investigators and bondholder lawsuits against the firm allege. 

   In fact, investigators allege, the sales were actually paper transactions that essentially allowed Matthews &amp; Wright to "sell" and control the bonds before their resale to investors, without putting up any money. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
