ID: 115	RANK: 100	SCORE: 6.697174
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870730-0137 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Dance:
Return of the Bolshoi: Still Great in Name Only
---
By Dale Harris</HL>
<DD> 07/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Long before Moscow's Bolshoi Ballet opened at the Metropolitan Opera House on June 30, the entire three-week season was completely sold out. 
The reason for all the excitement, one could only conclude, was that dance lovers cherished their memories of the troupe's previous appearances in this country. 
Not so much, perhaps, the last one at New York's State Theater in 1979, when the Bolshoi looked coarse and drab, but the 1959 tour, say, when Galina Ulanova, Maya Plisetskaya and an assemblage of excellent dancers were revealed for the first time to our admiring, often incredulous eyes. 
Or the 1966 visit, when, despite the absence of Ulanova, a company no less distinguished closed the old Met. 

   Yet once the curtain went up, it quickly became clear that memory had nothing to do with the audience's enthusiasm, that people were simply responding to a brand name, a combination of managerial and critical hype having made the Bolshoi a synonym for the superhuman. 
How else to explain the gasps of admiration, the cries of joy, the raging bravos that greeted dancing of mostly second-rate quality? 
How could anyone who remembered the Bolshoi in the '60s respond with such fervor to a highlights program offering a bedraggled excerpt from "Les Sylphides" (Tatyana Golikova and Alexsei Dovgopoliy); an amateurish pas de deux from "The Talisman" (Nina Semizorova and Aleksandr Vetrov); and "The Dying Swan" (Alla Mikhalchenko), performed without a trace of lyricism, grace or feeling? 
Did no one recollect what Maya Plisetskaya had once made of the last? 
Or the bravura with which the Bolshoi used to tear through the disarmingly corny "Spring Waters," a piece that now, with Inna Petrova and Leonid Nikonov, overtaxed both the dancers' skill and stamina? 

   But it was more than the memory of the Bolshoi that was absent; it was the memory of real dancing. 
Hadn't anyone among those cheering "Le Corsair" with the ungainly Alla Khanashvili-Artyushkina and Vitali Artyushkin ever seen it with Gelsey Kirkland and Mikhail Baryshnikov? 
Who could have gone into a frenzy over either the overripe Lyudmila Semenyaka or the oversold Nina Ananiashvili in the third act of "Raymonda" after having witnessed the majestically grave Margot Fonteyn in the same work? 
Who, indeed, could think that any of the Bolshoi's ballerinas were up to snuff who had watched, across the plaza at Lincoln Center only a month before, New York City Ballet's Merrill Ashley in "Brahms-Handel," Darci Kistler in "Divertimento No. 15," or Kyra Nichols in anything? 

   Dancers rarely transcend the choreography upon which their technique and style are founded. 
Members of the Bolshoi are currently trained to meet the demands of artistic director Yuri Grigorovich, whose ballets have now taken over the old repertory completely. 
Leonid Lavrovsky's silent-movie-style "Romeo and Juliet," which opened the first Bolshoi season in America in 1959, has given way to Mr. Grigorovich's, in which narrative and drama are replaced by daubs of all-purpose movement. 
In "Romeo," as in the rest of his works, the same solos keep turning up throughout the evening, whether danced by the virgins or the whores, the good guys or the bad. 
So do the same tortured pas de deux and the same overheated ensembles, in which, though the pacing is invariably frenetic, nothing ever happens. 
All his ballets look padded, in fact, because they are built on reiteration. 
Drama, development, architecture are invariably sacrificed to mere accretion, a wearisome push for substance and force. 

   Mr. Grigorovich's choreographic sensibility is essentially macho. 
In his ballets, combative men unfailingly have the lion's share of the action. 
In "Romeo and Juliet" -- only the first act of which was given at the Met -- the Montague and Capulet lads continually throw themselves at one another, snarling and flexing their muscles. 
Same with "Spartacus" -- New York saw only act two -- which is full of fights between dastardly Roman soldiers and noble, clean-living slaves. 
"The Golden Age," which won the choreographer a Lenin Prize, is a puerile fable about the moral superiority of communism and its inevitable triumph over capitalism. 
The ballet's hero, Boris (Irek Mukhamedov), is not merely a decent upstanding member of the Komsomol, the League of Young Communists (a fact played down in the Met's program), he is a champion athlete. 
Rushing on stage to rescue the lovely Rita (Natalya Bessmertnova), he vies with her would-be seducer like a contender for the decathlon, later celebrating the triumph of decency by sailing through the air like a missile. 

   While there's no denying the exhilaration produced by Mr. Mukhamedov, who jumps higher and more vigorously than any dancer in the West -- and does so, moreover, with a pleasing air of modesty -- the excitement is short-lived. 
The force that drives Mr. Grigorovich's heroes has less to do with dance than with display, less with expression than with aggression. 
Boris, Spartacus and the rest are as oversimplified as Rambo. 
Their appeal, likewise, is to the primal instincts, not the imagination. 
Women have no function in these ballets beyond that of emphasizing the superior strength of men. 
In themselves, they are without value, purpose or individuality. 
While there is nothing interesting for anyone to dance in a Grigorovich ballet, the men at least get to show off. 
The women are left to shift for themselves. 
As a result, most of the resources of classical ballet are simply unexplored by the company, which, instead, proffers showmanship -- and Eastern bloc showmanship, at that: tacky, cynical and crudely assertive. 

   For the 19th-century masterpieces, Mr. Grigorovich's leadership has proved disastrous. 
As we discovered in 1979, he is prepared to sacrifice the heritage of Russian ballet by assimilating works like "Swan Lake" and "The Sleeping Beauty" to his own fustian style. 
In such productions of Petipa, the choreography is brought up to date -- transformed, that is, into an exercise in power, the principal aim of which is not to dazzle the audience into illumination but to zap it into acquiescence. 
Robbed of musical architecture and dynamic variety, the old ballets lose all meaning. 
The greatest of Petipa's gifts, that of inventing dances that move inevitably toward a state of ever greater clarification, is here nullified. 
Mr. Grigorovich renders choreography pointless -- for which reason, no doubt, each of his numbers, whether original or adapted from an earlier choreographer, ends with a snap of the hands, a signal for the audience to applaud. 
Vulgar as the gesture is, it is the only way he knows to bring a dance to any sort of resolution. 

   The same problems are visible in his versions of the Coralli-Petipa "Giselle" and Petipa's "Raymonda," both new to this country. 
In "Giselle," moreover, he also robs the drama of meaning by replacing the mime -- specific in reference and a necessary foil for the formal numbers -- with the visual equivalent of heavy breathing, thus letting the audience know that something significant is going on without making clear what it is. 
He also performs the feat of introducing a troupe of tarantella dancers into the Rhineland, where "Giselle" is set. 
As for "Raymonda" -- the third act of which, often performed alone, contains a wealth of ravishing choreography -- it is poorly danced and tendentious, a drably staged allegory of the triumph of purity over lust. 
These two productions, presented in hideous decors by Simon Virsaladze, the Bolshoi's resident designer, look like arguments for the death of classical ballet. 

   The Bolshoi is now at the Kennedy Center in Washington, through Aug. 1. 
Then it performs at the War Memorial Opera House, San Francisco, Aug. 4-9; and the Los Angeles Music Center, Aug. 11-30. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
