ID: 115	RANK: 49	SCORE: 8.144736
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881013-0095 </DOCNO>
<HL> Tonight on TV: A Primitive Ritual Minus the Blood </HL>
<AUTHOR> Robert L. Bartley </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   "The issue is settled at a large public meeting that might be likened to a court. 
But no testimony is taken in support of either of the two versions of why the wife has left her husband. 
Instead, the 'disputants' take turns singing insulting songs at each other." 

   So a tribal rite of the central and eastern Eskimo is recorded by Marvin Harris in "Culture, People, Nature," an introduction to anthropology. 
The audience renders judgment by how hard it laughs at each song. 
"Eventually one of the singers gets flustered, and the hooting and hollering raised against him becomes total -- even his relatives have a hard time not laughing." 
The man who loses the song duel usually gives in, Mr. Harris observes, and this solves disputes "independently of abstract principles of justice." 

   What does this have to do with today's events, you wonder? 
I've been perusing anthropology this last little while, plumbing the deeper meaning of spectacles like the one George Bush and Michael Dukakis submit themselves to tonight at UCLA. 
The natives call this peculiar rite a "presidential debate," but it's freighted with far deeper symbolic and mystical meanings. 

   Obviously it has nothing to do with "abstract principles of justice." 
No one pretends the outcome depends on which candidate has the better ideas for advancing the welfare of the Republic. 
On the issues, Sen. Dan Quayle shellacked Sen. Lloyd Bentsen. 
The latter's principal theme was a shopworn economic jingoism that, when adopted by the top of his ticket in the aftermath of the debate, was denounced not only here but in the Washington Post. 
Yet the whole tribe understands that Sen. Quayle "lost" and Sen. Bentsen "won." 
What mystical vibrations tell us this? 

   ---
   Anthropologists have a firm grip on the concept of the ordeal, especially in the passage from one social status to another. 
"Rites of passage are universal," the Britannica instructs us, and archaeology "strongly suggests that they go back to very early times." 
In the archetypical puberty rite, young men and/or women are separated from the tribe to undergo fasting, various humiliations and often real wounds. 
Old clothes are often destroyed and new ones donned; indoctrination is given in social mores and religious beliefs. 
Upon weathering the ordeal, the youngster becomes an adult. 

   Similar rites are involved in ascending to positions of leadership; a new shaman, for example, is expected to work, drink or drug himself into a trance. 
While the Britannica's author disagrees, the early British anthropologist A.M. Hocart "thought that all rites of passage were based on the model of ritual of investiture of kings, in which symbolic killing and rebirth of the new ruler, and sometimes actual killing of the old, were required." 

   The prize for excess in terms of violations required of rulers (as well as in many other things) goes to the high Indian civilizations of meso-America. 
"They offered sacrifices of their own blood," wrote Diego de Landa, the first bishop of Yucatan. 
"Sometimes they scarify certain parts of their bodies, at others they pierced their tongues in a slanting direction from side to side and passed bits of straw through the holes with horrible suffering; others slit the superfluous part of the virile member leaving it as they did their ears." 
Bishop de Landa, recalled to Spain in 1568, went down in history as a book-burner for destroying the Maya codices, an act that seems more understandable as we learn more about their civilization. 

   "The Blood of Kings," Linda Schele and Mary Ellen Miller entitled their book on the Maya. 
They envision the Maya ceremony, with processions of elaborately costumed dancers, musicians, warriors and nobles prepared by days of fasting and steam baths. 
Well into the ceremony the king and queen would come before the assembly to draw their own blood as described by Bishop Landa, collecting it on special bloodletting paper to be burned as an offering. 

   "The participants, already dazed through deprivation, public hysteria and massive blood loss, were culturally conditioned to expect a hallucinatory experience. 
The rising clouds of swirling smoke provided the perfect field in which to see the Vision Serpent; gazing into the smoke, the celebrants may have actually seen it." 

   ---
   With the advance of civilization, our own culture offers more muted colors to anthropological observers. 
David I. Kertzer ("Ritual, Politics, and Power") notes that political concession speeches unify the tribe. 
J. McIver Weatherford ("Tribes on the Hill") has discovered a richer vein in the swamps of Congress. 

   Versailles under Louis XIV, he reminds, offered pageants mobilizing the entire French aristocracy, its mistresses and friends and "whole villages of ancillary artisans" -- jewelers, goldsmiths, haberdashers and hairdressers. 
"Because the rituals of Congress focus on the written word," he continues, they "induce an insatiable appetite for speech writers, public-relations experts, secretaries, clerks and artisans with related verbal skills. 
The fashions in word usage and the changing manner in which they are presented vary as much as the hair arrangements and styles in silk stockings at the French court." 
Mr. Weatherford sees the fate of Louis XIV as a warning to Congress. 

   Presidential debates are a recent institution, and we're left to our own resources in applying the corpus of anthropology. 
What we seem to have here is some kind of primitive ritual, with simple rules. 
Anyone who wants to be president has to submit to torture by the shamans of the press. 
If you blink, you lose. 

   What this has to do with governing the nation I am not sure; somehow I would rather have Dan Quayle standing by than Tom Brokaw or Morton Downey. 
But it is the way we do things; presumably, like other rites, its function is to make us all feel part of the same tribe. 

   ---
   Mr. Bartley is editor of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
