ID: 115	RANK: 87	SCORE: 6.953094
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880401-0010 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- 'Making Music Together': The Sad State of Soviet Dance </HL>
<AUTHOR> Dale Harris </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Boston  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The purpose of Boston's "Making Music Together" is to further the cause of East-West cultural relations. 
This year, the Soviets have unleashed a horde of Muscovite musicians and dancers upon Boston; next year, Boston will return the compliment by sending Moscow a team of comparable Americans. 
If, that is, the money can be raised. 
True, the Soviet government is committed to paying two-thirds of the cost, but the remaining sum is likely to be enormous, and the festival's originator, Sarah Caldwell -- as always, feckless as well as fearless -- apparently has exhausted her credit with Boston's financial community. 

   The current festival, supported to the tune of half a million by the state legislature, had to be rescued from disaster at the last moment by a further $400,000 from the governor of Massachusetts. 
Presumably, Michael Dukakis found the idea of a bailout more acceptable than that of an international crisis at this uncertain stage in his career. 

   Though Boston's financial leaders are shaking their heads at the thought of what will happen when all of this year's bills come in, Ms. Caldwell is optimistic that part two of "Making Music Together" will indeed take place in 1989. 
For the sake of the poor Muscovites, one can only hope so. 
As far as the dance component of the current festival is concerned, the programs have confirmed what other recent Soviet offerings have made abundantly clear: The U.S.S.R. has little to show the U.S. and everything to learn from it. 

   A carefully chosen survey of American works and performers -- from Balanchine to Merce Cunningham and beyond -- would prove immensely beneficial for a city like Moscow, whose leading ballet company, the Bolshoi, is artistically moribund. 
Moribund, but factionalized. 

   What Ms. Caldwell obtained for Boston was essentially the splinter group headed by Maya Plisetskaya, the company's nominal "prima ballerina assoluta", who has been at loggerheads for many years with its artistic director, Yuri Grigorovich. 
Apart from the contribution made by Ms. Plisetskaya, the troupe had little to offer beyond the overemphatic manner that was on display at the Met last summer, the same lack of musicality and uncertainty of technique. 

   In the "Raymonda" pas de deux, the talented Nina Ananashvili again looked as though she could do with a year of Balanchine (preferably his allegros), while her partner, Andris Liepa, was as flaccid as ever. 
For the rest, the only adequate response is sadness that a once-distinguished school of dance should have declined so precipitously. 

   Maya Plisetskaya is in an entirely different class from the rest of the troupe. 
The historical film clips of the ballerina shown at Sunday's "Hommage a Plisetskaya" astonished the capacity audience. 
In the excerpts from act one of "Don Quixote," she leapt into the air with the force of an eagle. 
In the grand pas from "Raymonda," she invested the steps with a cold intensity that gave them a mesmerizing clarity. 
Today, alas, at the age of 62, she displays few signs of her old kinetic vibrancy. 
The majestic manner persists. 
She still poses in arabesque as if staking out a claim to new territory. 
But the loss in energy has robbed her dancing of its essential element. 
She throws herself into her roles with heroic will, but the conviction has gone. 
Her movements are brittle, inexpressive, an adjunct to facial acting. 

   The real problem, however, is that she has nothing suitable to appear in. 
The great 19th-century classics, which she danced in her prime, are beyond her present physical capacities. 
Those she has taken up in her declining years -- Maurice Bejart's "Isadora," Alberto Alonso's "Carmen Suite," and Roland Petit's "Rose Malade" -- are trash. 
Her current repertoire, which ill-advisedly includes Pavlova's "Dying Swan," demeans her, prevents her from making fitting use of her remaining capacities. 
Especially unhelpful are those ballets she has concocted for herself out of various literary masterpieces. 
"Anna Karenina" (shown in Boston, along with "The Seagull" and "The Lady With the Dog") is less a sustained narrative than a series of opportunities for the heroine to act hysterical. 

   One understands why she began to choreograph. 
Yuri Grigorovich ignored her from the moment he took charge at the Bolshoi in 1964, so she was forced to create a repertoire for herself. 
Unfortunately, her ballets, while different in approach from his, are no better, only more naive. 

   But even before the arrival of Mr. Grigorovich, she was unfulfilled artistically. 
In all her years at the Bolshoi, which she joined as soon as she graduated from the company's school in 1942, Ms. Plisetskaya has never found a choreographer capable of fully realizing her prodigious gifts. 
She is probably the prime example in dance of that tragic waste of talent that seems to have been all too common in the U.S.S.R. Given her enormous talent (and her tragic background -- her father was a Jewish engineer who died in a gulag; her mother was sent to a labor camp), one can only take pleasure in the outpouring of warmth that greeted her at the end of "Hommage a Plisetskaya" while regretting what the artistic achievement of her long career might have been. 

   On Sunday, there were telegrams from the Reagans, Frank Sinatra, Mike Nichols and a number of important dance figures. 
There were speeches about the festival, there were accolades for Ms. Plisetskaya. 
There was also art. 
In company with Susan Jaffe, Christine Dunham and Leslie Browne, Mikhail Baryshnikov, formerly of Leningrad's Kirov Ballet, and now director of American Ballet Theatre, danced the revised version of Balanchine's sublime "Apollo" with a blend of spontaneity and concentration that charged the entire evening with wonder. 
It was the most edifying of all the tributes to the Bolshoi ballerina: dancing that exemplified a great artist's dedication to perfection. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
