ID: 269	RANK: 47	SCORE: 9.462584
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880607-0010 </DOCNO>
<HL> Justices Expand Union Workers' Right to Sue --- U.S. Labor Law Doesn't Bar Suits Over Dismissals, Supreme Court Rules </HL>
<AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> MYG LABOR TAXES GOVMT </CO>
<IN> TRA INS </IN>
<G> SUP TRN CNG FED </G>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Supreme Court said that, where state law permits, union employees have the right to sue employers over a dismissal, even when their contract provides a grievance procedure and remedies. 

   The decision, in a 9-0 vote, gives union employees added clout in many states and subjects employers to more lawsuits under state laws seeking compensation and punitive damages. 

   The ruling, which is likely to have significant impact, came in a high court decision on a technical point of whether federal law pre-empts state law. 
The high court ruled that federal labor law doesn't bar workers covered by collective bargaining agreements from suing their employers for damages under state laws for claims that they were fired for filing workers' compensation claims or making other complaints. 

   Under the ruling, union employees battling what they consider unfair firings aren't limited to arbitration procedures in the contract, through which they may generally win back pay and job reinstatement. 
Where state law permits, employees will also be able to sue for damages. 

   The precise circumstances in which fired employees may sue varies with the laws of the states and wasn't an issue before the high court. 
Some 34 states permit workers to sue for damages in what are called "retaliatory discharge" cases, where a worker is fired for actions ranging from making a workers' compensation claim to reporting safety violations to government agencies. 
In many states, the right to sue is even broader, applying any time an employee claims that a firing was unfair. 

   The U.S. Chamber of Commerce warned in a friend-of-the-court brief that a decision like the one issued yesterday "would permit employees to pursue hundreds of potential state wrongful discharge claims premised upon whatever nebulous and vague public policies the 50 states and their judiciaries might at some point deem worthy of protecting." 

   The case on which the court ruled involved policy in Illinois, which bars retaliatory discharges for employees who file workers' compensation claims. 
Jonna Lingle said she was injured on the job in 1984 and filed a worker's compensation claim at the Herrin, Ill., plant of the Norge division of Magic Chef Inc., which is now part of Maytag Corp. 
The company fired her six days later for filing a false claim. 

   The union filed a contract grievance against the company and later won reinstatement and back pay for Ms. Lingle, but she also sued for damages. 
A federal district court in Illinois dismissed the lawsuit in 1985, ruling that the dispute should be settled under the collective bargaining agreement. 
Last June, the federal appeals court in Chicago, voting 8-2, agreed and dismissed the lawsuit. 

   Yesterday, in an opinion written by Justice John Stevens, the high court reversed the appeals court and reinstated the lawsuit, ruling that federal labor law only preempts state law when the collective bargaining agreement must be interpreted to resolve the dispute. 

   Drug Testing
   The justices, who are already scheduled to hear arguments in the fall over the constitutionality of Customs Service drug testing of some employees, agreed to review federal regulations requiring drug testing of railroad workers involved in accidents or violations of safety rules. 

   The high court will review a 2-1 ruling last February by a San Francisco federal appeals court that blood and urine testing regulations issued by the Federal Railroad Administration violate railroad workers' Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable searches. 
The appeals court said the requirement for testing after an accident is unreasonable because there is no individual suspicion to justify the personal intrusion. 
The Reagan administration appealed to the high court. 

   Open Market Committee
   The high court let stand a ruling last December by a federal appeals court here dismissing a challenge by Sen. John Melcher (D., Mont.) to the makeup of the Federal Reserve Board's policy-making committee, the Federal Open Market Committee. 
The appeals court said the senator can ask Congress to change the committee, which sets monetary policy by expanding or contracting bank reserves. 

   The suit said the Open Market Committee is unconstitutional because, besides the seven Fed governors, it includes five presidents of regional banks in the Federal Reserve System who aren't appointed by the president or confirmed by the Senate. 
The Constitution requires that executive authority be exercised by those appointed by the president and approved by the Senate. 

   Other Cases
   --The justices let stand a ruling that Washington state needn't refund hundreds of millions of dollars collected through a tax on manufacturers' gross receipts that the high court struck down last June. 
Estimates of the tax collected from 1980 through 1984 are between $200 million and $423 million. 

   --The high court refused to hear a challenge by units of Guilford Transportation Industries Inc. to a 1986 federal law that forced the companies to settle a rail labor dispute in Maine with the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees. 

   --In another 9-0 decision written by Justice Stevens, the high court struck down a Colorado law that prohibits sponsors of drives to place referenda on the election ballot from paying workers who collect signatures on petitions. 
The court said the state law violates the free speech rights of referenda sponsors. 

   --The justices agreed to decide whether federal employees may sue their unions for failure to represent them adequately, or whether federal workers are restricted to filing grievances with the Federal Labor Relations Authority. 

   --The high court let stand a $1.5 million punitive damages award in Mississippi against Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York for improper processing of a $87,136 employee death benefits claim. 
The case was the latest in which the justices refused to consider arguments that punitive damages are unconstitutional. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
