ID: 269	RANK: 48	SCORE: 9.441778
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871014-0130 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

By Stephen Wermiel
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/14/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FORGN AFRIC LABOR MYG
AIRLINES (AIR)
FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)
INSURANCE (INS)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether state courts may follow individual state laws for notifying foreign corporations of lawsuits against them, or whether they must adhere to the procedures of an international agreement. 

   The high court will hear arguments on whether the provisions of a 1965 Hague agreement, ratified by the U.S. in 1967, supersede state laws for serving lawsuits on foreign corporations. 
The appeal was filed by Volkswagenwerk AG, the West German parent company of Volkswagen of America Inc. 

   The legal issue is a technical, procedural one, but it has practical significance for the orderly handling of international legal disputes. 
The Hague agreement was intended to assure that a lawsuit filed in one country actually finds its way to the parent company in another country, that the legal claims are translated into the defendant's language, and that the defendant has adequate time to respond. 

   If states disregard the Hague agreement, said the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association in a friend-of-the-court brief, it "threatens (to prompt) the re-Balkanization of methods for serving American judicial process" on foreign companies. 

   Under the Hague agreement, each of the 30 countries that have ratified it or honor it must designate a central agency to receive requests from abroad for serving lawsuits within its borders. 
Last year, for example, the Justice Department received 5,033 requests from abroad to serve lawsuits on persons or companies in the U.S. 

   In the case the Supreme Court will review, Volkswagenwerk AG was sued in state court in Chicago by a man whose parents were killed in a head-on collision involving the 1978 "Rabbit" they were driving. 
The lawsuit alleged that the company made and sold a defective vehicle. 

   Notice of the lawsuit was served on an Illinois company authorized by Volkswagen of America to receive lawsuits in the state. 
But the West German corporation argued in the Illinois courts that it hadn't been properly notified in West Germany of the lawsuit because the Hague agreement wasn't followed. 
The Illinois courts rejected the company's argument that the Hague agreement provides the exclusive procedures for serving lawsuits on foreign companies and designated the Illinois company an "involuntary" agent for the West German corporation. 
The West German parent company then appealed to the high court. 

   The Reagan administration also filed a friend-of-the-court brief, urging the high court to hear the case and to enforce the terms of the Hague agreement. 
The administration said there is "substantial" disagreement among state and federal courts about the proper procedure. 
And it said the governments of France, West Germany, Japan and Britain sent diplomatic messages urging a Supreme Court decision. 

   ---
   South African Airways
   The justices let stand the Transportation Department's revocation of operating rights at U.S. airports for South African Airways. 
The landing rights were revoked last October as one sanction authorized by Congress in the Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986. 
A District of Columbia federal appeals court rejected the airline's appeal, and the Supreme Court yesterday refused to hear the case. 

   ---
   Worker Protection
   The justices agreed to decide whether state laws clash with the purpose of federal labor law when they bar companies from firing employees in retaliation for filing worker's compensation claims. 
Federal law calls for arbitration of labor contract disputes, while many states give workers the right to sue employers over some similar issues. 
Federal and state courts are split over which law should prevail. 

   The court will hear an appeal by a woman who was fired in 1984 by the Norge division of Magic Chef Inc., now part of Maytag Corp. 
The woman said she was injured on the job and asked that her medical bills be paid, but the company fired her for what it said was a false worker's compensation claim. 
The woman sued, claiming that the company violated an Illinois law that bars retaliatory discharges. 

   A federal district court in East St. Louis, Ill., ruled that her claim of illegal discharge was simply a dispute over whether the company's action was justified under the collective bargaining agreement, a matter for arbitration. 
A federal appeals court in Chicago agreed. 

   Since the lawsuit was filed, the woman has won back pay and reinstatement through arbitration. 
But if allowed to sue under state law, she could also claim punitive damages. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
