ID: 103	RANK: 36	SCORE: 7.689878
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880627-0048 </DOCNO>
<HL> To Mark Year 2000, Some Events Will Be Out of This World --- Fears of Apocalypse Spark Plans for Rescue by Blimp; A Big Bash at the Pyramid </HL>
<AUTHOR> Ann Hagedorn (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Busy, busy, busy. 
So much work, so little time. 
Richard Kieninger is racing to assemble a fleet of blimps to rescue hundreds from the major earthquakes he believes will rumble across the globe on May 5, 2000. 

   His fleet will float serenely over the hurly-burly until calm is restored, which he figures will take two weeks. 
Then, he and his followers will land and start a brave new world like the one they now inhabit: Adelphi, Texas, the Town That Lives by the Golden Rule. 

   "Sounds kind of far out," Mr. Kieninger concedes cheerfully, "but it's wise to prepare. 
Some people could be driven mad just due to the terror of it." 

   You think that's weird? 
Think again. 
He's not alone. 

   The imminent arrival of the new millennium is just now beginning to dawn on the collective consciousness. 
While most of us have trouble trying to schedule a lunch date for next week, some folks are making plans already for the year 2000. 
Not all of them see a looming doomsday. 
Some see a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for putting on the glitz. 

   One group has booked the Great Pyramid of Cheops in Egypt for a monumental bash on the eve of the new millennium. 
Some 1,750 revelers will travel in high style on the Queen Elizabeth II. 
The itinerary includes a stop in Marseille to load the cargo hold with cases of champagne that the French Champagne Growers Association has agreed to donate. 

   Comedian George Burns is planning to attend the black-tie affair -- with a date (he'll be 103). 
So are Deng Xiaoping and baseball commissioner Peter Ueberroth, according to the founder of the Millennium Society, Edward McNally, a lawyer in New York. 
Mr. McNally says Pope John Paul II has acknowledged the invitation but apparently hasn't decided yet whether to attend. 

   Then there are those who are more interested in the commercial possibilities of the new millennium. 
Twentieth Century Fox has registered a new corporate name: Twenty-First Century Fox. 
Publishers are filling bookstores with a raft of new titles on the topic by astrologers and other assorted soothsayers. 

   Lever Bros., the consumer-products giant, is test-marketing a new soap called Lever 2000 in Atlanta. 
An employee says the name initially was chosen in part because it was thought to suggest "a breakthrough in soap technology." 
But the suds-of-the-future concept apparently didn't go over big. 
So Lever 2000 now is being promoted as a soap designed to clean the body's "2000 parts." 

   "Soon, every major company will use it for some kind of promotion," Alvin Toffler, the author of "Future Shock," predicts. 
"And by the year 2020, there 'll be a whole new industry built on remembering the year 2000." 

   That kind of unwary optimism is alarming to disaster theorists like Mr. Kieninger, who frets that the world won't awaken in time to the imminent peril. 
He and his followers believe that a massive buildup of ice on the South Pole will force a catastrophic shift in the Earth's axis. 
In their view, the buildup will trigger a series of earthquakes, tidal waves and volcanic eruptions beginning in the mid-1990s. 

   Disaster theorists believe the earthquakes will reach a climax on May 5, 2000, when Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn become aligned with the Earth and the sun. 
"Office towers . . . would rock, flinging people around inside like rag dolls," writes Jeffrey Goodman in the last chapter ("Coping With Reality") of his book "We Are the Earthquake Generation." 

   By that time, Mr. Kieninger says confidently, he and his followers will be safely airlifted off the surface of the planet. 
So far, he says, 250 have reserved seats on the blimps, which will take off from sites in Texas, Illinois and an island in the South Seas. 

   Mr. Kieninger says he expects thousands more to seek refuge as the catastrophe nears. 
But that's no problem, he says. 
"We'll sleep in shifts." 

   Publishers are beginning to cash in on the burgeoning fears of an apocalypse. 
They're bringing out a spate of new books on Nostradamus, a prophet of the 16th century, who predicted an apocalyptic end for the world around the year 2000. 
Video stores in New York and California report waiting lists of up to three months to rent a film on the prophet narrated by Orson Welles. 

   Such fears aren't unusual, historians say. 
Toward the end of any century, says historian Hillel Schwartz, "there is always a sense of things falling apart." 

   Michael Barkun, a history professor at Syracuse University, agrees. 
In his paper "Apocalypse Chic: Waiting for the Year 2000," Mr. Barkun says a period of "nervous anticipation" typically precedes years ending in zeros. 
The more zeros, he says, the greater the anticipation. 

   All kinds of happenings will take on an exaggerated significance as harbingers of the future, Mr. Barkun says. 
He predicts the year 2000 will be a "lightning rod for people's anxiety about the future." 

   Robert Lerner, a history professor at Northwestern University, says the period before the year 1000 was characterized by "a jitteriness, a sense that the time was right for strange, portentous things to happen." 

   Legend has it that Europeans, fearing the end of the world, fled to the hills to await the Second Coming in the year 1000. 
The few remaining chronicles of the period suggest that little actually happened. 

   Seven years before the turn of the millennium, "Mount Vesuvius gaped far more often as is his wont and belched a multitude of vast stones," Radulphus Glaber, a monk of the Benedictine Order, wrote in 1005. 
Despite the ominous augury, the year turned out to be a real yawner. 
Otto III, the Holy Roman Emperor, dug up the bones of Charlemagne to remind his subjects of the empire's past glories. 
That was about it for excitement. 

   After the turn of the millennium, "there was a great sense of relief," says Mr. Lerner. 
Church building boomed. 
The monk Radulphus Glaber wrote that it was "as though the very world had shaken herself and cast off her old age and were clothing herself everywhere in a white garment of churches." 

   Mr. McNally and his Millennium Society are planning a more secular celebration. 
The group, which started planning its bash in 1979, currently has 3,500 members. 
If permitted, the group plans to stage events at 23 places around the world. 

   The celebration will begin in New Zealand, which lies just west of the International Date Line and will be among the first places in the world to enter the new millennium. 

   The group hopes to stage other celebrations at the Great Wall of China, Stonehenge, the Statue of Liberty, the Golden Gate Bridge and the Grand Canyon. 
With 12 more years to plan, Mr. McNally is dreaming even bigger dreams. 
"It may even embrace flights of the Concorde chasing midnight," he says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
