ID: 172	RANK: 57	SCORE: 5.151059
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870127-0128 </DOCNO>
<HL> Rating Reagan:
In Indiana, Admiration
For President Persists,
But the Doubts Grow
---
Reassurance in Talk Tonight
Sought by Panel Members
Who Fear Ineffectiveness
---
Poll Finds a Drop in Prestige
---
By Ellen Hume
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<DATELINE> INDIANAPOLIS  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As President Reagan delivers his State of the Union message tonight, Barbara Embry and her neighbors here want to be reassured that the president won't let the country drift for the remainder of his term. 

   "He's not the man he used to be," says Mrs. Embry, a 40-year-old housewife here. 
Emil Streicher, 67, a retired accountant, agrees. 
"I think the years in office and the problems he has had with his health are starting to take their toll," he laments. 
"It would be awful helpful to have a more forceful man." 

   Mr. Streicher, Mrs. Embry and nine of their neighbors were brought together by The Wall Street Journal to discuss their feelings about Mr. Reagan as he heads into the final two years of his presidency. 
Like many Americans, these Indianians are rooting for Mr. Reagan. 
They still admire him and are reluctant to say that his best days are over. 
But the way he has handled the Iran crisis, combined with his recent prostate surgery and his party's loss of control of the Senate, has raised serious doubts among these voters about his effectiveness. 

   "These voters are waiting and hoping for a sign that the Gipper has not lost his stuff," says Greg Schneiders of the Hamilton &amp; Staff polling firm, who moderated the Indianapolis discussion. 
"Perhaps Mr. Reagan's greatest obstacle now is the voters' belief that age, illness and adversity have finally sapped him of his political strength. 
His greatest advantage is their fervent hope that they are wrong." 

   To get back on track, these Indianians say, Mr. Reagan tonight should forcefully reassert himself, clearing the air with a full statement on Iran and offering initiatives on the issues they consider vital: arms control, education, competitiveness and the deficit. 

   According to a new, nationwide Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, 75% of the American people believe that Mr. Reagan is a less effective leader now than at the start of his presidency, and 61% agree with the proposition that he no longer has so clear an idea of where he wants to lead the country. 
White House strategists believe that tonight's speech is crucial to Mr. Reagan's hopes of reestablishing his active leadership after weeks of keeping a deliberately low profile. 

   The poll indicates that the public hasn't totally given up on Mr. Reagan. 
According to the telephone survey of 1,576 adults, which was conducted last Thursday and Friday, 55% still expect that he will be "somewhat effective" in solving the nation's problems over the next two years. 
However, more than twice as many people think he will be "not at all effective" -- 30% -- as think he will be "very effective" -- 12%. 
When a similar question was asked in February 1985 about expectations for the president's second term, 22% said they expected him to be very effective, while 14% said not at all effective. 

   Concerning terrorism, Central American problems and foreign trade, more Americans say they have no confidence at all in Mr. Reagan than say they have a lot of confidence. 

   Unlike the nationwide poll, the Indianapolis discussion group isn't a scientific sampling. 
But the comments of these Americans help amplify the findings of the national survey. 

   These Indianians believe that the Iran crisis has been overblown by the media, but they are deeply disappointed by how Mr. Reagan has handled it and they still wish that he would make a clearer statement about what happened. 

   "I think in my heart that he knew more about what was going on and I think he ought to just tell us. 
I don't think his credibility is any good now because of that," says Karen Auler, a 46-year-old office manager. 

   Sandra Powell, 51, a bookkeeper who is a staunch supporter of Mr. Reagan, blames the media for "dragging Reagan through the mud" but concludes, "I was disappointed; I felt he did have more to tell" about the Iran policy. 
She is frustrated by Mr. Reagan's retreat into the background and believes that his failure to speak out more fully on Iran has eroded his effectiveness. 
"It's himself that's the biggest obstacle," she says. 

   Mr. Reagan's recent low profile -- dictated by both his surgery and the desire to separate him from the Iran crisis -- has hurt his image as a strong leader, these people say. 
James Louzon, 35, a college-educated ironworker, says, "His age and his health lately are really bad. 
He's listening too much to his advisers. . . . 
I think other countries are looking at him that he's an older guy, and he's not quite with it right now, and he may not be with it from now on, and they are going to try to take advantage." 

   Gloria Ramsey, 38, a school secretary, adds: "You don't have cancer and have surgery and have the weight of the United States of America on your shoulders without part of it being a little too much." 

   In the nationwide Journal/NBC poll, 60% said they think Mr. Reagan is healthy and vigorous enough to be an effective president during the next two years, while 33% don't believe he is. 
Yet if he could legally run again in 1988, when he will be 77 years old, only 28% of those polled said they would vote for him while 63% said they wouldn't. 

   The president's travails continue to drag down his job-approval ratings in the Journal/NBC poll. 
In the most recent survey, only 49% rated Mr. Reagan's performance as excellent or good, while 50% said he is doing only a fair job or a poor one. 
Last October, before the Iran-Contra scandal broke, 61% gave him favorable marks and 38% rated him unfavorably. 

   The scandal has clearly attracted a great deal of public attention. 
In the poll, 89% said they had been paying it a lot or some attention. 
Americans don't feel that the scandal itself is as important as other pressing issues; by majorities of more than three to one, they say they are more concerned about such issues as arms control, the federal deficit and drug abuse than they are about the Iran affair. 

   But the scandal and other factors seem to have raised questions about presidential leadership that, Americans feel, have yet to be answered. 
In the poll, 71% of Americans think Mr. Reagan isn't as fully in charge of his administration as he should be, up from 60% in a survey taken earlier this month. 
Seventy-one percent also think he should take responsibility for the Iran-Contra affair. 

   In the Indiana discussion, Mr. Streicher observes: "He could have cleared this up so quickly if he had come out forthrightly and said something." 
Mr. Streicher is disappointed that the president hasn't fired aides who didn't serve him well on the Iran policy: "There are a few along the way that he should let go. . . . 
Any executive, and particularly one of his caliber," should be able to do this, he says. 
Susan Hotseller, 34, the secretary-treasurer of a deputy sheriffs' fraternal organization, believes the Iran policy showed that Mr. Reagan relies too much on his aides. 
"It is not totally his decisions," she says. 

   But most of all, these voters are frustrated that Iran seems to have diverted attention from domestic issues that they believe are more pressing. 
"I think what he ought to do if he wants to be a good president is get things -- domestic problems -- straightened out, get people working and making a decent wage and get things rolling here," concludes James Noland, 54, a retired telephone installer. 

   Thus, Mr. Reagan could score points with the Indianians tonight by outlining his plans for helping to save jobs by restoring American economic competitiveness with foreign companies. 

   "Eventually, there is going to be no United States. 
It is all going to be foreign," says Pauline Monroe, 55, a waitress at the Grotto club. 
Adds Mrs. Ramsey, the school secretary: "A lot more Japanese people are buying things here. 
And Middle Eastern people owning a lot of our land, a lot of our businesses. . . . 
It makes me nervous to have so many foreign countries owning things here and controlling things here." 
Mr. Reagan also might win back some ground by reminding Americans tonight about the drop in inflation and interest rates during his presidency -- economic pluses that the Indianians seem to have forgotten. 

   When respondents in the nationwide Journal/NBC poll were asked to choose from a list the one thing they would most like to see the president accomplish before his term ends, 29% said they hoped for a plan to reduce the federal budget deficit; 22% cited an arms-control agreement with the Soviets; 20% chose a program to increase U.S. economic competitiveness; 19% said a national crackdown on drug abuse; and 6% said getting the Strategic Defense Initiative going. 

   But most of the Indianians in the Journal's discussion group think Mr. Reagan will spend the rest of his term working to shore up previous achievements rather than pressing any bold new initiatives. 
"He's probably going to spend his last years trying to justify his programs and his actions," says Mr. Noland, the retired telephone installer. 
Adds Mrs. Monroe, the waitress: "I don't think Reagan is going to do anything during the last two years. . . . 
I don't think the Democrats would let him start anything and get it going good." 

   Yet these Indianians are hoping that the president most of them still admire will reassert himself and try new initiatives before he leaves office. 
"I think he wants to end on the upswing," says Mrs. Auler. 
"I'd like to see him do that." 

   And at least one of them thinks that Mr. Reagan is being seriously underestimated and will again seize control of the national agenda. 
"Before too long he's going to make one good last shot at it," says William Funkhauser, 54, who works at a knife-sharpening service for professional chefs. 
"That will wake everyone up." 

   ---
   'Would you say Ronald Reagan was a more effective leader when he first became president than he is now, or would you say he is more effective now?' 

   More effective at first 75% 

    More effective now           16%
   Not sure 9% 

   ---
   'Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: "President Reagan does not seem to have as clear an idea of where he wants to lead the country now as he used to"?' 

   Agree 61% 

    Disagree                     35%
   Not sure 4% 

   ---
   'How effective do you think Ronald Reagan will be in solving the problems facing this country during the next two years?' 

   Very effective 12% 

    Somewhat effective           55%
   Not at all effective 30% 

    Not sure                      3%
   The Wall Street Journal/NBC News Poll
</TEXT>
</DOC>
