ID: 278	RANK: 1	SCORE: 22.299500
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880112-0080 </DOCNO>
<HL> Pizza Makers Slug It Out for Share Of Growing Eat-at-Home Market </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joanne Lipman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> PSY PEP MCD </CO>
<IN> RFD MKT </IN>
<TEXT>
   For years, Pizza Hut has tried everything to get you to its restaurants. 
Not anymore. 

   Starting tomorrow, a new ad campaign spotlights wholesome, Middle America types enjoying Pizza Hut pizzas at home, on the beach and in the car -- with barely a glimpse of people eating in the familiar red-roofed restaurants. 

   Why the home-and-hearth look? 
Blame that annoying new cliche, the couch potato. 
"Consumers today are dollar rich and time poor. 
They don't want to eat in restaurants," says Charles Henderson, marketing vice president for Godfather's Pizza Inc., which also is working on a new ad campaign to reach the couch-bound. 
"It is absolutely essential to our success that we promote, advertise and market delivery." 

   And therein lie the ingredients for what may become 1988's biggest food fight, as the nation's pizza chains slug it out for a bigger slice of the fast-growing takeout and delivery business. 
This year "is going to be tremendously more competitive than 1987," says Mr. Henderson of Godfather's, a Pillsbury Co. unit. 
Adds Bob Barry, an executive with Godfather's new ad agency, Minneapolis-based Fallon McElligott: "There's going to be guerrilla warfare in the next couple of years." 

   But the takeout and delivery business isn't the only battlefield for the pizza makers. 
The chains also are warring over price. 
Deep discounting, led by fast-growing upstart Little Caesars Pizza, spread rapidly last year. 
And pizza experts say price slashing, two-for-one offers, and a barrage of coupons will continue to increase in 1988. 

   "We have taken the gloves off," says David Novak, senior vice president of marketing at PepsiCo Inc.'s Pizza Hut unit, the nation's largest chain. 
"If we have to cut our prices to be competitive, we will cut our prices. 
We aren't going to let anybody invade our territory without the fight of their life." 

   What's more, the chains may have to contend with fast-food leviathan McDonald's Corp., which is testing a pizza product of its own in Charleston, S.C., and Salt Lake City. 
The single-serving pizza isn't expected to be introduced nationally this year. 
But the chains aren't above taking an early swipe at the potential challenger. 
"If you taste their current McPizza," Mr. Novak says, "you'd know why they are in the hamburger business." 

   Pizza Hut isn't taking any chances, though. 
It already has charted plans for a McPizza counterattack that would compare its pizza to that offered by McDonald's. 
"Any time McDonald's decides to play the game, they obviously can have an impact," Mr. Novak says. 

   The stakes are high in the costly fight for pizza dominance. 
Americans spent more than $20 billion at pizza restaurants last year -- including takeout and delivery orders -- accounting for 12% of the $175 billion to $180 billion in total restaurant spending, says George Rice, president of GDR/Crest, a Chicago company that follows restaurant trends. 

   Pizza consumption is still increasing, Mr. Rice says, and much of the growth in recent years has been in the pizza takeout and delivery chains. 
Delivery-only Domino's Pizza Inc., the country's second-biggest chain, has grown explosively in recent years by promising delivery to couch slugs in 30 minutes or less; it now holds more than half of the delivery market nationwide. 
Takeout chain Little Caesars has grown even faster. 
Sales shot up from $63.6 million in 1980, when there were 226 stores, to an estimated $770 million, at 1,864 stores, in 1987 -- making it the third-largest chain overall and the leader in takeout pizza sales. 

   "I'm sure you've heard about the cocooning of America and all that," says Mike Raymond, national marketing director for Domino's, Ann Arbor, Mich. 
"We're in sync with an overall consumer trend." 

   But both chains face powerful attacks this year from Pizza Hut and Godfather's as well as from hundreds of smaller chains. 
With Pizza Hut's latest ad campaign, created by its new agency BBDO, "We want to say to the world, 'We're the pizza to eat at home,'" Mr. Novak says. 
For now, however, only about 700 of Pizza Hut's more than 5,000 U.S. restaurants deliver pizza; the company plans to boost that to at least 1,000 by year end and ultimately hopes to deliver in every market. 

   Similarly, Godfather's has seen takeout and delivery sales double to 60% of its total sales in the two years since Pillsbury bought the then-unprofitable chain. 
And it plans to push those sales even more this year, Mr. Henderson says. 

   Meanwhile, Mr. Rice of GDR/Crest says 35% of pizza-chain customers got discounts through coupons or other promotions in 1987, up from 30% the year before. 
Much of the increase was spurred by increasing competition from Little Caesars. 
The company, which started in 1959 as a tiny takeout restaurant in suburban Garden City, Mich., burst into the big leagues a few years ago after starting a permanent two-for-one pizza special. 

   Last June, Pizza Hut decided to match Little Caesars with its own two-for-one deals. 
The other major competitors followed, and each now offers a two-for-one deal at least some of the time. 
Other kinds of discounts, including newspaper coupons, have soared, too. 

   The promotions will continue to increase in 1988, Mr. Rice predicts. 
The discounting is likely to be particularly sharp this month and next, a period dubbed "Death Valley Days" in the business because sales are usually so slow. 
Domino's this month began its first national ad campaign for a two-for-one offer. 

   "We didn't want to sit back and watch our customers be enticed by other competitive promotions, so we decided to join the fray," says Mr. Raymond, the marketing director. 
He adds, "In all likelihood, you'll see an increase in our promotional activity, both local and national" this year. 
Others, including Godfather's, say they also will likely beef up promotions this year. 

   Critics contend the discounts will translate into poorer quality pizza as the chains scramble to cut corners. 
Plenty of industry analysts already complain about the chains' pizzas -- after all, how much can taste matter to chains whose commercials often feature pizza boxes more prominently than pizza itself? 
Some analysts say the chains may start mixing in cheap, preprocessed cheese to reduce costs -- a charge every chain interviewed vehemently denied. 

   Mr. Rice expects that instead of cutting back on quality to keep prices down, the chains will begin marketing different products to different audiences: budget pies for people who want to fill their stomachs on the cheap, and premium pies for those willing to pay more. 

   Pizza Hut, for example, is developing an economy pie and has introduced several gourmet pizzas. 
Godfather's has introduced a less expensive, thin-crusted pie used in its two-for-one specials. 
It developed the economy line because "we didn't want to cannibalize our premium-product sales," Mr. Henderson says. 

   "There's a high end and a low end," he adds. 
"And we don't want to get caught in the middle." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
