ID: 278	RANK: 47	SCORE: 13.564692
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870303-0080 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<IN> JAPAN MCD PSY PEP
FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN>
<DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In the great Tokyo pizza wars, Ernest Higa is a field commander. 

   Every evening from his base in western Tokyo's Ebisu area, the 34-year-old deploys 16 motor scooters that are specially designed to do battle in Tokyo's narrow streets. 
In just 15 months, aggressive pizza deliverymen in red, white and blue uniforms have become a familiar sight in Tokyo's upscale neighborhoods. 

   "First it was just a fashion. 
Then all of a sudden it was a boom," says Mr. Higa, who recently opened his fourth Domino's Pizza store. 

   The home-delivery competition here is unlike anything a pizza entrepreneur would find in the U.S. or Europe. 
For one thing, no street names and a cumbersome address system make Tokyo a tough city to navigate. 
For another, in addition to other pizza squads there are more established rivals delivering everything from sushi to noodles to smoked eel. 

   But the constant battles in the Japanese fast-food market are nothing new to Mr. Higa (pronounced HEE-guh) and his family. 
They practically invented the idea of bringing American fast food to Japan. 
With frozen pizza, Pepsi-Cola, Kentucky Fried Chicken and now Domino's Pizza to their credit, the Higas are something of a First Family of fast food here. 

   In addition to Ernest, there is his father, Yetsuo "Yets" Higa, a 71-year-old Hawaiian native and the family patriarch. 
There is his older sister, Merle, who brought frozen pizza to coffee shops in the 1960s when everyone assured her it would flop. 
And there is Merle's husband, Shin Ohkawara, the president and chief executive officer of Kentucky Fried Chicken Japan Ltd., with 611 outlets, the most outlets anywhere outside the U.S. (Two other brothers aren't involved in the fast-food business.) 

   The Higas are major players, but they aren't the only fast-food giants in Japan. 
At a time when much of the Japanese economy is sluggish, eating at restaurants is a huge growth industry. 
In 1985, the Japanese spent about $122 billion eating out. 

   A large portion of the total was spent in fast-food outlets. 
Not just at the predictable McDonald's or Kentucky Fried Chicken but also at scores of Denny's, Steve's, Wendy's, Anna Miller's, Dunkin' Donuts, Mister Donuts and Haagen-Dazs shops. 
Japan now has the greatest number of American food franchises outside of North America; between 1974 and 1984 the number of outlets rose from 265 to 1,490. 

   "All of the successful restaurant concepts here have come from the United States, not Europe," says Ernest Higa. 
"Saying you are from the U.S.A. is the best way to show you are different from the sushi shop down the road." 

   Most American fast-food chains try to break into the Japanese market by setting up a joint venture with a local Japanese company. 
McDonald's Corp. signed a 50-50 agreement with Den Fujita to form McDonald's Co. (Japan) Ltd. Kentucky Fried Chicken Corp. and Mitsubishi Corp. formed a 50-50 agreement to create Kentucky Fried Chicken, Japan. 
And more recently, Pillsbury Co. joined forces with Suntory Ltd. and a Japanese dairy firm to form Haagen-Dazs, Japan. 
Once established, most companies tend to retain control of new outlets rather than sell franchise rights. 

   In contrast, "Yets" Higa has been a solo operator from the beginning. 
The son of sugar-cane workers who emigrated from Okinawa to Hawaii in the early 1900s, Mr. Higa went into the trucking business and became a millionaire before his 40th birthday. 

   In the 1950s, Mr. Higa began diversifying. 
First, he bought a Pepsi bottling plant in Okinawa, targeting thirsty American servicemen stationed there. 
Then he got the idea to push the cola business into Japan and began a long, difficult series of negotiations with the Japanese government. 

   "I went over to Ichiro Kono, the minister of agriculture. 
I said, 'You've got to let us in,'" Mr. Higa recalls. 
"They kept saying it just wouldn't go here. 
The Japanese thought cola tasted like medicine. 
They kept saying the Japanese wanted lemon or orange juice, not cola." 

   The government finally gave in, and Mr. Higa says he learned a valuable lesson. 
"Japanese move little by little," he says. 
"But Americans should also know that when Japanese are pushed right to the edge, they give in." 

   In retrospect, though, it was a Pyrrhic victory; the Pepsi-Cola franchise rights that Mr. Higa had fought so hard to win never paid off very well. 
Coca-Cola Co. entered the market at the same time and gradually dominated the business in Japan. 
In 1970, Mr. Higa sold his interests in Pepsi to C. Itoh &amp; Co., a major Japanese trading concern. 

   For the next 10 years, Mr. Higa turned his interest to bathroom deodorizing units and water-purification systems. 
Shortly thereafter, though, Mr. Higa, a man whose love of Pepsi, pizza and baseball never flagged, was ready to take another plunge into the food business. 

   Having passed up earlier chances to bring in McDonald's and Kentucky Fried Chicken -- both of which have been enormously successful in Japan -- Mr. Higa vowed that he wouldn't let another fast-food opportunity elude him. 

   When he learned that Thomas Monaghan earned enough money selling pizzas to single-handedly buy the Detroit Tigers baseball team, Mr. Higa, his son Ernest and his daughter, Merle, headed for Michigan. 
Domino's Pizza Inc., based in Ann Arbor, already boasts 3,500 outlets and continues to grow rapidly. 
The Higas won the sole rights to market Domino's pizza in Japan, and in September 1985, with Ernest in charge of day-to-day operations, Y. Higa Corp. delivered its first pizzas to Tokyo homes. 

   Actually, the Domino's agreement represented the Higas' second venture into the pizza business. 
Back in 1964, Yetsuo Higa had tried to market a frozen pizza in Japan, despite numerous warnings that the rice-loving Japanese wouldn't take to doughy crusts, tomato sauce or cheese. 
"At first, we didn't sell too many pizzas," he concedes. 
But that only inspired him to build a pizza factory in Kyushu, Japan's southernmost main island, to cut import costs and lower prices. 

   It was Merle Higa, the oldest of the four children, who really got that pizza business moving. 
Her original intention after finishing law school in Switzerland was to start a doughnut business. 
But her father's advice to get into pizza changed everything. 

   When Ms. Higa took over the business in 1966, frozen pizza was still a long shot. 
The average Japanese didn't have freezer space, let alone an oven. 
And the most common response to supermarket taste tests was that "cheese looked and tasted like soap," she recalls. 
But she kept going, peddling her pizzas to restaurants and fancy hotels. 

   Ms. Higa's big break came when the Royal Host family restaurant chain agreed to serve her pizzas. 
Today, at 45, she is president of JC Foods, the largest producer of frozen pizzas in Japan, and has two factories churning out an average of five million pizzas a month. 
"We rode on the coattails of all the restaurant businesses that were growing by leaps and bounds," she says. 

   One of the keys to the success of Higa family members is their understanding that they aren't just selling food. 
More than anything, they are selling the American life style. 

   Nobody preaches this with more conviction than Merle Higa's husband, Shin Ohkawara, the president of Kentucky Fried Chicken's empire in Japan. 
"We sell the idea of good old America. 
Green pastures, fresh air, clean water," says Mr. Ohkawara, who walks around in a red Kentucky Fried Chicken jacket adorned with Kentucky Fried Chicken patches. 

   Some of Mr. Ohkawara's chicken outlets look like a small bit of Kentucky plopped down in suburban Tokyo. 
Out front is a life-sized Col. Sanders. 
On the walls are pastoral farm scenes. 
The background music in the television commercials is strictly Stephen Foster. (It is, naturally, only one slice of American life. 
"We don't sell the image of New York or AIDS or robberies," Mr. Ohkawara cautions. 
"America's image isn't 100% good.") 

   The only Japanese citizen in the family, Mr. Ohkawara, 42, is also in many ways the spiritual heart of the Higa family. 
He rose to the top the hard way -- sleeping on flour bags in the back of the first chicken outlet in Nagoya and taking baths in sinks used to wash chickens. 

   The family respects his ability to innovate, especially his knack for thinking up new reasons to eat chicken. 
Even though the Japanese don't have a tradition of eating turkey on Christmas, Mr. Ohkawara helped promote a Christmas chicken campaign. 
Now, on Christmas Day, many Japanese stand in line for hours to get a barrel of Kentucky Fried Chicken for the kids. 

   Though the family tries to keep its various businesses separate, sometimes Mr. Ohkawara can't help passing on some of the advice he got from Col. Sanders. 
"I tell Ernie, 'Don't fool the customer. 
Even if you have an M.B.A., go to the store every day. 
Stick with the basics, and don't try to be everything to everybody. 
Just make the best pizza in Japan.'" 

   In many ways, the future of this fast-food family lies with the youngest and newest food entrepreneur in the family, Ernest Higa. 
He has the same entrepreneurial spirit that drives the rest of the family. 
But he also brings some modern management theories picked up at Wharton, Columbia Business School and the London School of Economics. 

   Juggling his lumber and pharmaceutical import businesses, the youngest Higa has learned that it isn't enough to simply import products that have been successful in America. 
"The key," he says, "is knowing what to adjust and what to leave alone." 
He retained Domino's 30-minute delivery guarantee, for example, despite the difficulties of home delivery in Tokyo. 

   Last year was so successful -- more than $1 million in sales at each of his first three stores -- that this year Ernest Higa hopes to open 10 to 12 new ones, extend store hours to include lunches on weekends and expand his fleet of scooters to at least 120. 

   One problem is where to put the new stores. 
Soaring Tokyo land prices make it nearly impossible for new ventures to afford space in prime locations. 
Ernest Higa says he has already thought of that. 
"We don't want to be near train stations. 
It's too hard to get the bikes in and out," he says. 
"The no-seating, home-delivery concept is right for the Tokyo real-estate situation." 

   But the advantages of takeout business haven't escaped the more than 10 competitors who have entered the pizza fray in recent months. 
And the competition may be moving closer to home. 

   If Ernest Higa's home-delivery pizzas really take off, they could come into competition with his sister's frozen pizzas. 
And though Mr. Ohkawara has so far concentrated on chicken, he may also become a pizza competitor if PepsiCo, which recently bought Kentucky Fried Chicken and got half of Kentucky Fried Chicken Japan, puts him in charge of its Pizza Hut operations here. 

   David Board, vice president of Domino's Pizza International, says he isn't worried about intra-family competition. 
"If Merle does well, that's good for pizza and the Y. Higa Corp. 
If Ernie does well, that's also good for the Y. Higa Corp. What's good for the Y. Higa Corp. is good for Domino's," he reasons. 
But, he adds, "either way the Higas win." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
