ID: 278	RANK: 62	SCORE: 12.294734
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870918-0123 </DOCNO>
<HL> PepsiCo's Pizza Hut Signs Agreement
For Soviet Venture; McDonald's Next?
---
By Mark D'Anastasio
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PEP FREST MCD
FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   PepsiCo Inc., which introduced American soft drinks to the Soviet Union 14 years ago, signed an agreement with food-service officials to open two Pizza Hut restaurants in the Soviet capital. 

   If approved, as expected, by the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, the agreement would represent the first Soviet joint venture signed with a U.S. company. 
It would also make Pizza Hut, the largest pizza chain in the U.S. and a subsidiary of Purchase, N.Y.-based Pepsi since 1977, the first U.S. restaurant company to operate in the Soviet Union. 

   "We're looking forward to these two restaurants as an experiment to find out exactly how a joint venture operates in the Soviet Union," said Donald Kendall, Pepsi's chairman emeritus and a major figure in promoting U.S.-Soviet trade. 

   Pepsi also is negotiating to expand its Soviet soft-drink operations, which had retail sales last year totaling 200 million rubles ($330 million at the official exchange rate, though the ruble isn't convertible). 
Karl Nigl, director of Pepsi-Cola's Eastern European division, said prospects for expanding the existing 19 bottling plants were good because the Kremlin has ordered a threefold increase in soft-drink production as part of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's anti-alcohol campaign. 

   Pepsi distributes Russian-made Stolichnaya vodka in the U.S. 
The Soviets use the hard-currency earnings from the vodka sales to buy Pepsi concentrate for the Soviet-owned and Soviet-operated bottling plants in the U.S.S.R. Mr. Nigl said U.S. sales of Stolichnaya sales were about $300 million last year. 

   Pepsi's commercial relations with the U.S.S.R. date to when Mr. Kendall was president of Pepsi-Cola International. 
In 1959, he arranged a Pepsi exhibit at the American National Exhibition in Moscow, where the famous "kitchen debate" between Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and U.S. Vice President Richard Nixon took place. 
Photos of Mr. Khrushchev drinking Pepsi appeared in newspapers world-wide. 

   Later, Mr. Nixon for a time was a partner in a New York law firm and represented Pepsi on international issues. 
In 1973, when Mr. Nixon was president, Pepsi became the first Western consumer product widely sold in the Soviet Union. 

   Also in Moscow, representatives of McDonald's Corp. Wednesday completed a week of talks with city officials that advanced their bid to open three joint-venture fast-food outlets in Moscow. 
While no final agreement was reached, Oak Brook, Ill.-based McDonald's is expected to open Moscow's first hamburger restaurant in May, according to Sergei Borovikov, a city food-service official involved in the negotiations. 

   George Cohon, president and chief executive officer of McDonald's Restaurants of Canada Ltd., who led the recent company visit, said last month that a preliminary agreement had been signed after a decade of negotiations. 
Soviet officials say the remaining obstacle to a final agreement is satisfying the company's demands for guarantees that Soviet ingredients, which will be used to make the McDonald's products, meet its standards. 

   Mr. Borovikov said McDonald's officials visited five Soviet food processing factories and hot houses to examine Soviet beef, ketchup, mayonnaise, potatoes, lettuce and tomatoes. 
"They're very serious about this," he said. 
A Canadian trade official said McDonald's had determined that Soviet potatoes can't be used to make McDonald's french fries. 

   Mr. Borovikov said five other U.S. and five European restaurant companies had submitted proposals to open outlets in Moscow. 
The first and only foreign restaurant company to operate in the Soviet capital is the Indian Tourism Development Corp.'s Delhi Restaurant, which opened in July. 

   The consensus among Western commercial officials was that the Soviets weren't interested in allowing many foreign restaurants to operate in Moscow, and that their primary interest was in learning first-hand about the efficient operating systems employed in Western fast-food restaurants. 
The Soviets are trying to improve food services in Moscow, and studying American methods may help. 

   The Soviet media in the past has heaped scorn on the American fast-food industry, contending it sold tasteless food while exploiting youth labor. 
But last November, Soviet television broadcast a flattering portrait of a McDonald's restaurant on New York's Fifth Avenue, near the Empire State Building, that showed employees hustling behind the counter to fill orders. 
The Russian commentator said, "Maybe there is something we can learn from this." 

   Mr. Kendall said that most ingredients needed for Pizza Hut products were available here and that only special flavorings would be imported. 
All equipment will be provided by Pepsi, while the Soviets will build the restaurants. 
One restaurant will sell pizzas for hard currency and the other for rubles. 
Earnings from the ruble outlet will be used to pay local bills, while earnings from the hard-currency outlets will pay for the limited amounts of imported ingredients. 
Soviet service personnel will train at Pizza Hut outlets in London, Mr. Kendall said. 

   Soviet legislation permitting joint ventures with foreign firms was adopted in January. 
A small number of Japanese and European firms have signed contracts, while 14 proposals from U.S. companies are under consideration. 
But Mr. Kendall said that Soviet wariness toward the new idea was palpable. 

   "You have a lot of enthusiasm at the top for starting joint ventures," he said. 
"But when you get down to the working level, the fellow who has to execute that idea hasn't had any experience and obviously is going to approach it on a very cautious basis." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
