ID: 278	RANK: 88	SCORE: 11.156065
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880201-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> Eatery Chains Pour on Speed At Lunchtime </HL>
<AUTHOR> Robert Johnson and Tananarive Due (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> PSY PEP </CO>
<IN> RFD </IN>
<TEXT>
   These days, the lunch is to the swift -- a fact that hasn't escaped the notice of the restaurant industry. 

   As eating a midday meal has for many turned into a game of beat the clock, a growing number of full-service restaurant chains -- primarily those with outposts along busy suburban commercial strips -- are racing to get the food out faster. 

   While the exact extent of the trend is unknown, it's already spread far enough to have sparked a bit of one-upmanship. 
Bennigan's, a unit of Pillsbury Co., puts stopwatches on its restaurants' tables and promises to serve meals in 15 minutes or they're free. 
Stuart Anderson's Black Angus &amp; Cattle Co., a Los Altos, Calif.-based chain, offers a 10-minute-or-free menu that includes steaks and seafood. 
Pizza Hut, a subsidiary of PepsiCo Inc., offers a second pizza free if the first takes more than five minutes. 

   To be sure, some chains have tried this approach without success. 
Frisch's Restaurants Inc. in Cincinnati attempted a few years ago to hurry its servers and customers. 
"They said, 'Don't rush me,'" recalls Karen Maier, vice president of marketing at the company, who dismisses the stopwatch lunch as a gimmick. 

   But for many of those that are speeding things up, there have been benefits. 
Pizza Hut, for example, says its lunch sales have more than doubled since 1983, when it began putting stopwatches on tables. 
And since Bennigan's started "Express Lunch" a year ago, its lunch sales are up more than 5% -- an impressive increase during a lingering restaurant-industry slump. 

   In large part, the moves reflect changing attitudes that have turned lunch into the workday's third rush hour. 
Just as more employees have come to consider lunchtime as a multipurpose personal-business break rather than merely a chance to eat, some managers are using it to squeeze more work into the day. 

   "More and more, we're ordering out for salad and a fruit cup," says Ted Stolberg, a partner in Weiss, Peck &amp; Greer, a New York investment concern. 
"If a potential client doesn't seem to like talking business over a little something in the office, he's probably not my kind of guy." 

   Extending the philosophy to his firm's workers, Mr. Stolberg buys lunch for anyone who stays in the office over the noon hour. 
"It's worth it," he contends, "to keep them from spending extra time shopping on the way back from lunch." 
He says the offer is gaining popularity, though he concedes this is perhaps related to recent layoffs there. 

   Another factor in the decision to speed up service is the competitiveness of the industry itself, in which about half of the 17,000 new restaurants opened annually fail in the first year, according to the National Restaurant Association. 
Most full-service chains traditionally have concentrated on the dinner customer, conceding the lunch hour to fast-food chains. 
However, says James Shennan, a San Francisco restaurant consultant, "with the increasing competition for dinner, restaurants are finding the only way they can increase sales is to expand the use of their fixed plant and assets during the day." 

   Of course, the offers can cost a few free meals. 
"It's always a challenge when 20 customers come in at once," says Michael Jackson, manager of a Chicago Bennigan's. 
"You think, if I miss this one, it's 200 bucks." 
But slips notwithstanding, the chains insist the offers are profitable. 

   "If we had to pay very often, we wouldn't do it," notes Lane Cardwell, a Bennigan's spokesman. 
He says the chain was persuaded to try express lunches a year ago by one manager who dared it on his own. 
"It provides drama at lunch," Mr. Cardwell says. 
"It's like the lottery -- exciting when someone wins." 

   There are other potential pitfalls, however. 
Full-service chains, whose image depends heavily on ambiance, may find that eroded if they emphasize speed. 
"It could end up being the worst of all worlds," says Mr. Shennan, the consultant. 
"No matter how fast the full-service places become, they'll still be slower than McDonald's and Burger King. 
If the customer perceives he's giving up quality for service that's still not all that fast, it will hurt." (McDonald's Corp. says it serves most customers in less than a minute.) 

   As for the customers, some say the faster service allows them to enjoy their food more. 
"Just because I'm getting it quickly doesn't mean I'm eating quickly," says Donna Goldstein, a Chicago advertising executive. 

   Others, though, complain that rushing lunch adds stress and forces them to gobble antacids the rest of the day. 
Says Paul Camp, a restaurant critic at the Chicago Tribune, "This is the greatest thing that ever happened to physicians who treat gastronomic disorders." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
