ID: 142	RANK: 84	SCORE: 4.387266
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880805-0114 </DOCNO>
<HL> Making Wildlife Protection Pay in Africa </HL>
<AUTHOR> Kathleen Kouril </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AFRIC </CO>
<IN> ENV </IN>
<DATELINE> HARARE, Zimbabwe  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Wildlife conservationists here have been hawking a board game devised by the "Save the Rhino" campaign. 
Next year they may well be urging us to buy elephant-ivory necklaces and crocodile-skin handbags. 
For when Africans are allowed to make souvenirs and money out of wild animals legally, they become keen to protect them. 
And conventional conservationist tactics are not working; many large African mammals remain endangered. 
In Zimbabwe, a country long respected for its well-run national parks, 13 rhinoceroses on average are being taken out each week. 
Why? 

   The simple answer is: money. 
Poaching continues because park officials in most African countries haven't the resources to adequately police their reserves, and because those in some countries are bribable. 
Africa's safari/tourism community is still enraged over events in the Masai Mara last year when Kenyan officials allowed a hunting party of influential Middle Easterners to shoot dozens of buffalo, antelope and elephant in an obscene recreation of the days of the great white hunters -- right down to the group photograph with carcasses. 

   The more profound answer behind the simple one is also money. 
For the great mass of Africans, simple rural people, protecting wild animals doesn't pay. 
Never mind about long-term benefits and priceless ecosystems. 
Wild animals are simply a nuisance, eating up crops and occasionally small children, and competing with cattle for grazing space. 
Poachers often pay off local people to warn them when park rangers are about, so if protecting wild animals doesn't pay, endangering them sure does. 
And for chronically undernourished people, knocking off the odd impala seems a justifiable (and delicious) way to avoid hunger. 

   The wildlife industry is reckoned to be worth between $100 million and $200 million annually in Zimbabwe. 
Tourism and related souvenir industries keep Kenya ticking over. 
Hunting safaris in particular earn whopping revenues for African governments. 
One can shop around -- a license to shoot an elephant costs $1,000 in Tanzania, almost $2,500 in Zimbabwe -- but the combined costs of safari, fees and "trophy" processing usually come to more than $20,000 for a two-week jaunt. 

   Most African governments pay lip service but not much else to the principle of plowing those hunting revenues back into the rural communities. 
In Zimbabwe, where records are actually kept, from 1982 to 1987 the central government handed back only 49.5% of the revenue generated from wildlife to a fairly representative district, Nyaminyami, along Lake Kariba in the northwestern corner of the country. 

   A group of local councilors and residents called the Nyaminyami Wildlife Trust -- with more than a little help from the Save the Children Fund and other aid groups -- are trying to return the benefits of wildlife "to those who directly bear the costs," i.e. themselves. 
The Zimbabwe Trust, a coalition of foreign firms with blocked funds to spend, is helping them. 

   The Zimbabwe trust is proposing local management of the area's wildlife resources. 
Not just hunting revenues are desired, but also game-ranching projects, locally based cooperative tanneries, meat-processing facilities and souvenir workshops. 
Intensive farming of fish, crocodiles and ostriches is envisaged. 
For example, the Department of National Parks recently estimated ostrich farming alone could become a $20 million export business. 

   There are naysayers on grounds of principle. 
Wildlife film maker Hugo van Lawick, who lives in the Serengeti, says licensed hunting has provided a cover for poachers in Tanzania and Kenya. 
Others object to crocodile and ostrich farms, saying that the animals are penned up, overcrowded and badly treated. 

   The Nyaminyami trust is pitted against a formidable opponent, the European Community. 
In 1985, the EC began a $170 million, 10-year program to eradicate the tsetse fly in southern Africa. 
Though many Africans are beginning to question the wisdom of producing and exporting beef to a Europe with a beef mountain, high investments in cattle ranching must be protected from re-infestation by the pest. 

   It is impossible to eradicate the tsetse fly from ranching areas and not from adjacent lands. 
As more and more tracts of marginal bushland are relieved of the fly they are also being relieved of their wildlife, trees, ground cover and topsoil. 
One simply can't prevent rural Africans from moving, with their ravenous cattle, onto lands too poor to support heavy grazing once the threat of bovine sleeping sickness is removed. 
The zooming population growth of most African countries ensures a constant pressure on land already yielding to the processes of desertification. 

   The noisy protests of the trust and other conservation groups seem finally to have reached the ears of EC officials, who recently earmarked $2.5 million to support efforts to keep cattle out, and wildlife in, some parts of the areas involving tsetse eradication. 

   Wild animals are more efficient producers of protein on poor lands, says the trust -- not that the fine balance between wildlife grazing and the carrying capacity of the land is always maintained. 
In northern Botswana, where the poor quality of their ivory protects elephants from poachers, the elephant population is out of control and has eaten and knocked down many square miles of scrubby forest. 

   On an increasingly crowded and impoverished continent, clearly, wildlife has to be "managed" if it is to be saved. 
By at least thinking about giving incentives to local people to conserve wildlife, the Nyaminyami trust is moving in the right direction. 
Yet so far the trust seems plagued, like many development projects, with rather woolly ideas about the mechanics of making wildlife pay and contains rather too much talk of cooperatives. 

   Of course, the trust would not want to increase inequalities in wealth by putting resources into any private individual's hands (though it is working to secure tenure over land and the natural resources on it for local chiefs for the benefit of their communities). 
However, to date the most successful "harvesting" of wildlife has been in the private sector, such as at the crocodile farm at Victoria Falls. 

   People in other wild parts of the world are realizing conservation can pay. 
Fishermen on the Caribbean island of St. Lucia have set aside land for a nature reserve and agreed among themselves on new fishing practices to save endangered reptiles and fish -- and the fishermen's livelihoods. 
In Annapurna, Nepal, villagers have regained control over local woodlands after 30 years of government mismanagement left them with tragically depleted forests and a shortage of firewood. 

   "Managing" wildlife for the common good rather than "protecting" it for government ministers' pockets seems the only hope. 
One hopes the common good is up to the job. 
In the Okavango, a team of government rangers sent out for the common good to destroy a sick and dangerous elephant spent two weeks accomplishing nothing. 
The night I was there, poachers working only for their own good and the tusks, neatly did away with the poor creature with one shot. 

   ---
   Ms. Kouril, who spent last year in Africa, writes on the less-developed world. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
