ID: 142	RANK: 89	SCORE: 4.311673
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880524-0025 </DOCNO>
<HL> Eritrean Wins Put Mengistu on Defensive </HL>
<AUTHOR> Peter Worthington </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AFRIC FREST </CO>
<TEXT>
   One of the world's longest-running wars is in Eritrea -- the northern province of Ethiopia that is in its 27th year of fighting for self-determination. 

   I recently returned from five weeks in Sudan and Eritrea, looking into the plight of refugees and checking resistance groups opposed to the Marxist regime of Ethiopia's Lt. Col. Mengistu Haile Mariam. 
I was in Eritrea in mid-March when the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) scored a spectacular military victory that eliminated three Ethiopian divisions and a brigade. 

   Although every EPLF victory weakens the Mengistu regime, it also increases the suffering of the Ethiopian people. 
More troops are being moved into the north, food is scarcer for civilians in the Ethiopian-controlled areas as aid is restricted and foreign-aid workers are expelled, renewed napalm bombing has been reported in Tigre, and Lt. Col. Mengistu has appealed to Ethiopian patriotism to rally and resist an "Arab-sponsored invasion from the North." 
Reports are that every Ethiopian is now required to "volunteer" a month's pay or pension to the war effort. 

   The EPLF attack took place on the Nakfa front. 
One ambush wiped out the 29th Mechanized Brigade. 
A half mile of road was a tangled mass of tanks, armored carriers, trucks, guns and corpses. 
A second ambush at Kilhamet, on the mountain road between Afabet and Keren, was another killing ground. 
In this part of the world enemy dead are left to hyenas, vultures, crows, the sun. 

   In all, some 20,000 Ethiopian troops were killed or captured in the 48-hour battle. 
Most simply surrendered. 

   The advance was so swift that at Ethiopian corps headquarters in Afabet, the Eritreans captured three Soviet military "advisers" -- two colonels and a lieutenant -- and killed a fourth. 
Capturing senior Soviet advisers is something that Jonas Savimbi hasn't accomplished in Angola. 

   If it weren't in such a strategic location, Eritrea probably would have had its independence long ago. 
But it occupies more than 600 miles of Red Sea coast from Sudan to Djibouti. 
Were it to be an independent state, it would cut off Ethiopia's access to the sea -- something the West couldn't contemplate in the years after World War II when it and the United Nations were deciding the future of Italy's former colonies. 

   Libya received independence in 1952; Somalia got independence in 1960 after the U.N. put it in trusteeship to Italy for 10 years. 
But, under pressure from Western powers, the U.N. ruled in 1952 that Eritrea be federated with Ethiopia, a country to which it had few ties in language and culture. 
It was supposed to have autonomy; Ethiopia would be responsible for defense, foreign affairs, trade and currency. 

   Ethiopia abrogated the U.N. terms in 1961-62. 
It made Amharic the official language and banned Tigrinya (the predominant language of Eritrea), Arabic and Ge'ez. 
It dismantled Eritrean industries, banned unions, and in 1962 annexed Eritrea -- without holding a referendum, as the Eritrean constitution required. 
And the war began. 

   After Haile Selassie was deposed as emperor in 1974 and the U.S. decided not to support "revolutionary" Ethiopia with arms and weapons, Lt. Col. Mengistu turned to the U.S.S.R., saving Ethiopia from defeat by the Kremlin's other client state, Somalia, which had invaded the disputed Ogaden desert. 

   After that, Lt. Col. Mengistu decided to eliminate the irritation that was Eritrean independence. 
He failed, the Eritreans bounced back, and now it is Lt. Col. Mengistu who is threatened by Eritrea, as well as by other resistance movements throughout Ethiopia. 

   Ironically, Lt. Col. Mengistu's determination to unite Ethiopia by eliminating all opposition has divided the country as never before. 
Ethiopia's costly, losing war in Eritrea has spurred on Tigrean resistance, as well as encouraged rebel movements in Wollo Province and such groups as the Oromo Liberation Front and the Ethiopian People's Democratic Alliance. 

   Lt. Col. Mengistu's policy of forceably resettling people mainly from the dissident territories of Wollo and Tigre to quieter areas both creates resistance and contributes to famine. 
Farmers are conscripted into the army, property and food are confiscated for taxes, and a bad agricultural and economic situation is made worse. 

   In an interview last month, Sadiq El-Mahdi, prime minister of Sudan, estimated that two-thirds of some 700,000 Ethiopian refugees in his country were escaping the Mengistu policies rather than drought and famine. 

   "In 1984 we all suffered famine," he said, "but last year with the same weather conditions as Ethiopia, we in the Sudan not only fed ourselves but even exported food. 
Ethiopia's policies are often responsible for its famine." 

   Until recently Ethiopia had insisted none of its troops were EPLF prisoners. 
Even before its recent military victory, however, the EPLF claimed to hold more than 10,000. 
Eager to see some, I was taken to a valley a few miles from the now-fluid front, where I saw 7,000 or 8,000 prisoners -- all without shoes (to prevent escape); most seemingly relieved that for them the war was over. 

   All the officers I spoke to said they would be shot if they returned home. 
Maj. Shimeless Debebe said he was trained in the U.S.S.R., had been a soldier for 14 years, and was political commissar of the 19th Infantry Division. 
He said he had no intention of going home. 
Maj. Geiu Asrat Menda, commander of the 29th Mechanized Brigade, recalled a commanding officer who had failed in attack being paraded before division officers and shot. 
Lt. Tamiral Ohnrko said officers were expected to commit suicide rather than be captured. 

   Prisoners acknowledged that Ethiopian army morale was low, and that the Eritreans were motivated and good fighters. 
All said it should be the Eritreans' decision whether to remain within Ethiopia. 

   Every prisoner I questioned said the alliance with the Soviet Union wasn't popular in Ethiopia. 
"The Russians in Ethiopia make the Americans look good -- just as Mengistu makes Haile Selassie seem better," said one officer. 

   For their part, the Eritreans are increasingly concerned about how to feed and care for the prisoners, whose total is now close to 25,000. 

   Eritrea says it subscribes to the Geneva Convention and treats prisoners humanely. 
I saw no evidence of maltreatment. 
On the contrary, I saw many groups of Ethiopians who are no longer prisoners but have the status of free men. 

   In Eritrea I found high morale and unusual confidence. 
I had been told that the EPLF was Marxist, but though there is a central committee, Politburo and general secretary, I found no cult of personality, no dogma, and no slogans. 
Homage was paid to concepts of self-reliance, individuality, personal initiative and democracy. 
Before the Ethiopian revolution, the U.S.S.R. supported Eritrean independence. 
Now the Eritreans see the Soviet Union as an imperialist power whose methods are more oppressive than anything they'd experienced in the past. 

   There probably is greater sexual equality in Eritrea than in just about any other place in the world. 
Women serve in the front ranks of the army, and every woman fighter I talked to made a point of saying she will never go back to a subservient role. 
The men I talked to agreed, saying the future is one of equality. 

   When one thinks of Ethiopia and its civil war, one thinks of famine and refugees. 
But on the Eritrean side of the war zone one doesn't encounter much hunger. 
There are few international aid workers here, so Ethiopia's expulsion of foreigners in the areas it controls doesn't mean much as far as the Eritreans are concerned. 

   The Eritrean Relief Association has the job of feeding, educating and looking after the civilian population. 
It has a fleet of more than 200 trucks that nightly transport food and supplies on a 12-hour drive from Sudan into Eritrea, where they are redistributed to outlying areas. 
Tigre has a supply system similar to Eritrea's, though not as sophisticated nor as efficient. 

   I didn't see one starving person in the regions I visited. 
On the contrary, I saw camels loaded with flour and food heading behind enemy lines to feed people. 

   The Eritrean Relief Association says it originally budgeted $95 million this year to provide medicine, food, transport and services for 850,000 people. 
While Lt. Col. Mengistu's expulsion of aid workers and apparent moves toward confiscating Red Cross supplies don't affect people in the Eritrean war zone, Eritrean victories have left the relief association with a million people to feed and double the territory to cover. 
No Western government provides aid to the Eritrean Relief Association, though nongovernmental agencies and private relief groups provide funds. 
The association claims 95% of all donations go directly to the needy. 

   Many Eritreans have never known peace. 
The war, in fact, is older than many of the fighters. 
Few are willing to discuss the possibility of someday being part of a united Ethiopia. 
The bug of independence or self-determination has bitten too deeply. 

   It's too early to say how the Eritrean breakthrough on the Nakfa front will affect the war, but it has led Lt. Col. Mengistu to come to terms with Somalia so he can transfer more troops north, and to negotiate with Sudan's prime minister to try to curtail international aid to the Eritreans. 

   In the meantime, it is the civilian population in the Ethiopian-controlled zones that suffers most and endures the most hunger. 
There seems only one realistic solution to Ethiopia's problems, be they economic, social, political, or military: a coup to replace the paranoid, homicidal Mengistu regime. 

   Until that happens, there is faint hope for Eritrea, and less for Ethiopia. 

   ---
   Mr. Worthington, a columnist for the Financial Post of Canada, was previously an African correspondent for the now-defunct Toronto Telegraph. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
