ID: 142	RANK: 97	SCORE: 4.058315
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880412-0118 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Pachyderm Portraits </HL>
<AUTHOR> Raymond Sokolov </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Cynthia Moss left Newsweek in the late 1960s for a vacation in the game parks of East Africa. 
She was hooked for life and settled over there permanently in 1968, eventually embarking on a 14-year study of the free-ranging elephants in Kenya's Amboseli Park. 
For much of that time she lived in a tent with a view of Mt. Kilimanjaro. 
Although she was not a biologist when she arrived, she was a quick study and has published many articles in professional journals about every aspect of elephant life and death, based on a unique backlog of experience in the field. 

   In "Elephant Memories: Thirteen Years in the Life of an Elephant Family" (Morrow, 336 pages, $22.95), Ms. Moss speaks to the general reader, with charm as well as scientific authority. 
In the end, her elegantly written and ingeniously structured account makes a powerful argument for the preservation of elephants from poachers who supply ivory to Japanese carvers and from legal marksmen hired to "cull" park herds and thereby save trees from being devoured. 

   She was helped along by the African Wildlife Fund, the New York Zoological Society and various individuals. 
Her main tool of research was an aged Land Rover that took her safely among the big beasts. 
For all the years she went out day after day looking for elephants, her most basic and valuable activity was the one she began on the first day. 
It amounted to taking attendance. 
Having given every one of several hundred elephants an individual name and memorized their appearances from observation and from studying photographs systematically shot for identification purposes, she was then in a position to "know" a large wild population. 
And by the time you get even a short way into Ms. Moss's book, so will you. 

   Drawing on hundreds and hundreds of days of meticulous observation, Ms. Moss introduces her discussions of one subject or another with true stories built on real experience. 
Sometimes the narrative is clearly straight firsthand reportage. 
Other times it is a composite rendering or an imaginative reconstruction. 

   It is hard to see how any fair-minded person could object to these graceful vignettes. 
People with a strong aversion to anthropomorphic writing about animals will, however, find some passages to object to here. 
Ms. Moss is not shy about claiming to know what is in the minds of elephants at various times. 
On the other hand, many of her inferences do seem reasonable. 
For example, she concludes that an orphaned elephant calf is mourning his mother when he strokes her dismembered jaw, having come upon it in Ms. Moss's camp where she was studying it several weeks after the death. 

   Some of these anthropomorphic passages serve mainly to show something quite interesting about the mentality of a sensitive animal researcher. 
When she describes the death of the matriarch Teresia, from infected Maasai spear wounds, Ms. Moss imagines what the semiconscious elephant is thinking: "She had reached a state of feeling little and she mostly dreamed, perhaps of vast swards of sweet new grass and clear, cool hill streams. 
Or the taste and feel of the sweet juices that squirted out when she crunched down on her favorite wild fruit. 
Or most likely the smell and touch and sounds of her family -- those who were still alive and others who were long gone, her grandmother, mother, sisters and brothers, sons and daughters." 

   That's not merely an affecting passage, one which brings a sad tale of killing to an end, it is a window into the mind of Ms. Moss and it shows the sort of imaginative sympathy that drove her forward for 14 years and helped her define and solve formal problems of elephant behavior. 
By thinking herself as best she could into the processes of elephant "thought," using what she knew scientifically and intuitively about the animal she knew best -- herself -- she was able to position herself fruitfully in the park and to hypothesize effectively. 
If she had not been interested, as a woman, in motherhood and female sexuality, would Ms. Moss have been such a successful documenter of the patterns of movement and sociability that can be lumped together as an objective proof that elephant families are a functioning, self-conscious matriarchy? 
If she had not been struck, as a woman, by the grotesque exudations streaming from the temporal glands and four-foot, S-shaped penises of certain adult male elephants, would she have been led to identify this "disease" as musth, the sexual frenzy of male estrus never before documented in African elephants? 
The whole wild mess of musth never did appeal to her. 
"Personally," she writes, "I cannot imagine why Tia wanted to mate with Bad Bull, but then she may have seen something in him that I did not." 

   This is a passionate book written for the most part with scientific restraint. 
Ms. Moss cares deeply about educating the rest of us, but she also wants to communicate the orderly excitement of field research and of entering into elephant life. 
By drawing us in, she hopes to recruit all of us to her cause, which is the elephant's. 
In a brief call to arms at the end of this splendid addition to the literature of natural history, Ms. Moss permits herself a plea from the heart: "In the last two years I have realized that more than anything else, more than scientific discoveries or acceptance, what I care about and what I will fight for is the conservation, for as long as possible, not of just a certain number of elephants, but of the whole way of life of elephants." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
