ID: 120	RANK: 18	SCORE: 14.020283
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880831-0122 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Don't Poach Their Shellfish -- Or Else </HL>
<AUTHOR> John R. Alden </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   When it's sitting on a plate, all red and steaming, who thinks about anything besides cracking it open and sousing its meat in melted butter? 
But after the debris has been cleared away you may begin to wonder. 
How did that ungainly, overarmed lobster get from the bottom of the sea to the pot in the kitchen? 
Who caught it, who bought it, and how is the handsome sum you paid for dinner being divided? 

   "The Lobster Gangs of Maine," by James M. Acheson (University Press of New England, 181 pages, $20 cloth, $9.95 paper) answers these and a host of other questions about the livelihood of lobstering. 

   The American lobster is found from Newfoundland to the Carolinas, but the heart of its territory lies in the Gulf of Maine. 
These waters are full of the fish, mollusks and small crustaceans that lobsters like to eat. 
A rocky bottom and extensive kelp beds provide plenty of shelter. 
Finally, the mean annual temperature in the Gulf of Maine is about 50 degrees -- not great for swimming, but perfect for lobsters. 

   Lobsters are caught in traps or "pots," wooden or metal mesh boxes three to four feet long, two feet wide, and about 16 inches high. 
The traps are baited with herring or fish heads (which smell good to a lobster) and are attached, usually in pairs, to a brightly painted styrofoam buoy by a long nylon rope. 

   A typical lobster boat is about 35 feet long, with a high bow and a low, square stern. 
Routines vary, but usually two men fish together, hauling about 500 traps in a two- or three-day cycle. 
The men hook a buoy, haul the pots with a hydraulic winch, empty and rebait their traps, and drop them back onto the ocean floor. 
Captured lobsters are measured and checked for eggs (egg-bearing females cannot be taken); legal lobsters are pegged or banded to immobilize their claws and tossed into a holding tank. 
At the end of the day the catch is crated, weighed and sold to a cooperative or dealer for whatever price is posted. 

   Although this book tells a lot about lobsters and lobstering, it is primarily about the men who fish for them. (Women hold 9% of Maine's 9,000 lobster licenses, but only a few are among the state's 2,200 fulltime fishers.) 
Like ranchers and farmers, each lobsterman is an independent operator, owning his boat and gear and working on his own schedule. 
But he is also, this book emphasizes, part of a larger group -- a harbor gang. 
As is fitting for an anthropological study, these groups are the focus of Mr. Acheson's attention. 

   Harbor gangs are not formal organizations. 
Lobstermen pay no dues, have no membership cards, and never hold annual meetings. 
Still, the groups are real. 
The men in a gang see each other almost every day. 
They share information, comradeship, problems and skills. 
More significantly, the harbor gangs restrict entry into the group and they "claim and defend fishing areas." 
They are, in short, territorial. 

   In many ways, harbor gangs reflect the structure of Maine's coastal communities. 
In these towns you are either an outsider (tourist, summer person or newcomer) or a local. 
The distinction is sharp and clearly understood, and winning admission to the community is difficult for anyone "from away." 

   Joining a harbor gang is similarly difficult. 
Like the members of a community, the members of a harbor gang know each other by sight and reputation, share a set of values, and view outsiders with distrust. 
And while there is a clear hierarchy within gangs, distinguishing the most successful fishermen, or "highliners," from the "moderates" and "dubs," every member of a gang has the right to fish in the group's territory. 

   These territories are more than unofficial -- they are illegal. 
No one owns the ocean floor, and the state says a license to fish is exactly that. 
Nevertheless, every fisherman knows that if he sets his pots outside of certain limits his buoys will get cut. 
At $40 a trap, insisting on your right to fish for a $4 lobster in someone else's backyard becomes unprofitable quickly. 

   Why do lobstermen, who generally obey the other laws regulating their business, continue to preempt territories? 
The answer is clear: Only so many lobsters mature every year, and more people fishing means a smaller share for each. 
Mr. Acheson's data support this argument. 
Around islands, where territories are more strongly defended and entry into a harbor gang is more difficult, fishermen catch more lobsters per trap. 
Territorial rights, it seems, "help to conserve resources, promote economic efficiency, and result in higher incomes." 

   "The Lobster Gangs of Maine" is wonderfully entertaining, and the information it contained agreed with everything I have learned during a decade of summers on the Maine coast. 
But like any reviewer, I wanted to check. 
So I showed the book to a local fisherman. 
"Ayuh," he confirmed. 
"That's pretty much the way it is." 

   ---
   Mr. Alden, an anthropologist, writes from Maine, in sight of several hundred lobster buoys. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
