ID: 120	RANK: 25	SCORE: 12.662557
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880318-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> A Miracle in Maine: Sea Urchin Is Turned Into the Golden Uni --- Despised Creature Provides Town With New Export, A Delicacy for Japanese </HL>
<AUTHOR> Christopher J. Chipello (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> JAPAN </CO>
<IN> MON </IN>
<DATELINE> HARRINGTON, Maine  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Lobstermen hated them. 
Most people ignored them -- unless they happened to step on one. 

   For years, the prickly sea urchins that carpet much of the ocean floor off this hamlet were considered pests. 
The greenish, disk-shaped creatures mowed down shallow-water seaweed pastures favored by lobsters, chasing the delectable crustaceans far offshore. 

   Then, the Japanese arrived and changed, perhaps forever, the way Down Easterners view urchins. 
Along Maine's northeastern coast, where worm-digging, blueberry-raking and clamming rank as major occupations, folks are discovering there's gold in those spiked shells. 
Or something pretty close. 
Harrington now processes and exports urchins to Tokyo, from a factory run by Shiro "Sean" Nakagawa and staffed largely by locals. 

   It's as if New Yorkers discovered that cockroaches spin silk. 

   "Uni," as the Japanese call the orange-yellow reproductive organs that are the urchin's only edible part, "is more expensive than silver," Mr. Nakagawa notes. 

   He isn't joking. 
At Tokyo's Tsukiji fishmarket auctions, carefully arranged wooden trays of glistening uni fetch up to 8,000 yen, or $63, apiece -- at wholesale. 
That's more than $100 a pound. 

   Harrington has learned to love the lowly urchin's earning power. 
Palate appeal is another story. 
When a visitor to the uni plant accepts Pearl Smith's offer to sample the orange goo she has just spooned from a cracked-open shell, he quickly finds the sweet-and-pungent sea urchin isn't the hors d'oeuvre of choice hereabout. 

   Mrs. Smith snickers. 
Heads turn. 
Eyes roll. 
"He's eating the stuff," cries one woman over the country music blaring in the background. 
"Oh, my God!" swoons another. 
Sue Fickett, a 46-year-old worker from nearby Cherryfield, glares at the visitor and screams, "You're gross!" 

   Jessie McHatton, aged 72, is more genteel. 
"You and Nelson Rockefeller," she chides. 

   Nelson Rockefeller? 

   Mrs. McHatton, it seems, knew the gardener at the Rockefeller estate near Bar Harbor, Maine. 
And the gardener claims that Mr. Rockefeller -- or at least some of his guests -- savored urchin. 

   The cosmopolitan Rockefellers may have developed an appetite for urchin not in the Orient but on the Continent. 
To the French, the sea urchin is the "chataigne de mer," the "chestnut of the sea." 
Along the Cote d'Azur, urchins are consumed raw, like oysters, with a lemon or vinegar-and-shallot dressing. 
Martinique features urchin soup. 
In Japan, chefs lay slivers of raw uni atop seaweed-wrapped sushi. 

   Perry's Seafood, just down Route 1 from the uni factory, serves scallops, shrimp, clams and haddock, but no urchins. 
Barbara Perry says she has, however, thought of trying to deep-fry some -- a proposition that may strike devotees as akin to hard-boiling caviar. 

   Plainly, people here are more interested in the dough. 
"Any kind of business they can bring to Washington County is fabulous," Mrs. Perry says. 
One in five residents of the county, Maine's poorest, lives below the federal poverty line. 
Winter work is scarce, and the population has shrunk since the late 1800s. 

   Thus, people welcome the hourly wages, ranging from $4 for scooping the oozing organs from their shells to $5.75 for the more demanding task of sorting and arraying them delicately on trays. 
In Harrington, a town of 850, Mr. Nakagawa now employs about 40 people. 
Later this year, he plans to raise that to 120, the number he will need to increase production to 100 tons annually. 

   He will also need at least 10 million urchins to meet that goal. 
That will create more business for local fishermen. 
Some already haul in well over $1,000 worth a week -- better than they can do dragging for scallops or mussels these days. 
Indeed, Japanese purchases of everything from tuna to monkfish livers have been helping business, despite the occasional cross-cultural misstep: Some sly fishermen, for example, have been known to slip other livers in with those from monkfish, a practice that "really makes the Japanese mad," says Dallas Pyle, a Portland trader. 

   Japanese urchin merchants have been working the West Coast for a decade or more, using North American uni to supply Japan during the fall and winter, when the delicacy is popular but local supplies are limited. 
Until lately, air-transport costs made it impractical to exploit Maine's treasure trove. 
But the rising yen and dwindling California supplies led some traders to look again. 
Mitake Trading International Inc., a Los Angeles supplier to Japan's Daiei superstore chain, dispatched Mr. Nakagawa on a mission. 

   Mr. Nakagawa drove cross-country last May and spent four months scouring the Maine coast. 
The fishing seemed best toward Canada, but transportation was a problem. 
He settled on an abandoned garage here -- as far up the coast as he could get and still be within a day's drive of Boston's Logan International Airport. 

   He isn't alone. 
There are similar but smaller operations in two nearby villages. 
Others are shipping whole Maine urchins to Europe. 
And some Japanese traders, convinced that Mainers will never master the subtle art of uni processing, are sending whole urchins to Japan, too. 

   The Harrington plant does have its quality-control problems. 

   During snack break, Mr. Nakagawa delivers a pep talk urging extra care in scooping out the gonads, which have recently softened in anticipation of spring mating season. 
When a deliveryman arrives from Downeast Plastics of Cap Pele, New Brunswick, Mr. Nakagawa displays flaws in the last shipment of polystyrene packing trays: The edges on some had crumbled, causing at least one irate Japanese consumer to rail about polystyrene bits in his uni; others collapsed, spilling their precious cargo; the custom-made trays lack grooves to keep the urchins in place. 
It takes some diagrams, but Mr. Nakagawa gets his message across. 

   To the East Coast elite, the Maine coast may conjure up summer idylls. 
To Mr. Nakagawa and his two Japanese assistants here, it's more like the gulag archipelago: lots of sub-zero weather and 18-hour workdays. 
Mr. Nakagawa's wife, Kiyomi, liked California better. 

   Still, Mr. Nakagawa counts his blessings. 
Because he has a stable buyer, he expects to operate year-round, with a core labor force of about 30 in the summer. 

   For Washington County, there could be other benefits. 
"Everybody thinks it's going to help the lobsters," says Ron Hudson, a 47-year-old mussel fisherman turned urchin trawler. 
Everybody may be right. 
Larry Harris, a University of New Hampshire zoologist, says the urchins tend to overgraze, denying lobsters food and hiding places. 

   One cloud on the horizon: The urchin in Maine, as in California, could be overharvested. 
Trawling Frenchman Bay, Mr. Hudson fingers his long, brown-and-gray beard and ponders that danger. 
Already, his steel net is hauling in far fewer urchins of the acceptable size of 2 1/2 to 4 inches than when he began working the inlet last September. 
Neither he nor his brother, Robert, a former worm-digger, knows how long the smaller fry take to mature. 

   But salvation may be on the way. 
Several swipes of the net yield a half-dozen slimy, mud-colored animals known as sea cucumbers for every urchin. 
Mr. Hudson hears that the Chinese eat the things, and someone's looking into it. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
