ID: 120	RANK: 69	SCORE: 9.625102
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890728-0142 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890728 </DD>
<AN> 890728-0142. </AN>
<HL> Turtles Are Swell,
@  And Unlike Dogs,
@  They Don't Drool
@  ---
@  Now Endangered, They Are
@  Easy Targets For Ravens,
@  Mowers, Race Promoters
@  ----
@  By Lee Berton
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 07/28/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Speaking of turtles, there is something slower: The U.S. Department of the Interior. 

   Four years ago, three environmental groups asked the Department's Fish and Wildlife Service to list U.S. desert tortoises (land turtles) as endangered. 
This week, the tortoises finally made the list. 

   But it may be a little late: "Off-the-road vehicles, illegal collecting, suburban development and now a new respiratory disease have already ravaged the species," says James Middaugh, press director of the Environmental Defense Fund, one of the three groups. 

   "I've got to admit we dragged our heels," says Craig Rieben, the service's information officer. 
"Two of our geographical regions just couldn't agree on what to do." 

   Turtles may be cold-blooded, but they bring out tender feelings in warm-hearted people. 
When 87-year-old Beatie Vickers entered a nursing home in England, she insisted that Joey the turtle, whom she found in her garden decades ago, move in with her. 
"We've put it in a child's playpen in the garden, where Beatie goes all the time," says Ann Derry, who runs the home. 
"After all, she's known Joey since she was six years old." 

   As pets, turtles are appreciated by people with imagination. 
Marlyn Goldenberg, of the California Turtle and Tortoise Club's San Fernando Valley chapter, likes turtles because they "project love but don't overdo it." 
She adds: "Just because they don't wag their tails like dogs doesn't mean they're not affectionate. 
I tell my two turtles, 'Have a nice day,' when I go to work." 

   Turtles have been residents of the earth since Triassic times, 200 million years ago. 
But today, the order Testudinata is in danger. 
"Human beings may do them in before any of their natural enemies," says Glenn Stewart, a professor of zoology at California State Polytechnic University in Pomona, Calif. 
"We'd better be careful," he adds. 

   Maybe if people knew more about turtles, and how strongly some people take to them, the turtle would be treated with more respect. 
Two years ago Eric Platt of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., won a $1,500 court judgment against a landscaper Mr. Platt says killed the year-old, four-pound tortoise he had imported from Aldabra Island, off the coast of east Africa. 
"It's a rare animal and I was devastated when it was killed," says Mr. Platt. 
"It was run over by a lawn mower only eight days after I got it." 

   The landscaper didn't appear for a small-claims court hearing and Mr. Platt was awarded the turtle's cost by default. 
But Mr. Platt never received compensation for his loss. 
The landscaper has disappeared, and there's a warrant out for his arrest, says Mr. Platt. 
"Since then, I've gotten two turtles and they never leave my sight," says Mr. Platt, who runs an auto-tire repair shop. 

   Turtles aren't born to run, but some can go pretty fast. 
Al, a 325-pound African Aldabra at the El Paso Zoo, once whizzed around the zoo like a kid on a skateboard. 
That's because Al was attached to a skateboard. 

   After his forepaw was injured a few years ago, zoo employees devised the arrangement for Al. 
"He was then able to beat any hare at the zoo," says Robin Dalton, zoo curator. 

   In Boise, Idaho, Harlan Hansen, a retired electronics engineer, owns a turtle named Speedy that occasionally runs away from home to zip along a nearby freeway. 
"Boy, can that turtle travel," says Mr. Hansen. 
"They're supposed to be slow but this guy, even though he is 75 years old, has long legs." 

   At Brennan's Bar in Marina Del Rey, Calif., some turtles who have been racing over the past 14 years are far from slow. 
One recently flashed across the six-foot racetrack in 1.2 seconds. 
James Duffer, who runs the races wearing a velvet green tuxedo, does concede, however, that the slowest race took more than 25 minutes, or more than four minutes per foot. 
"Slow but sure won that race," he says. 

   But not everyone admires thoroughbred turtle racing. 
Two years ago the New Jersey Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals sued the Goal Post Restaurant in Fanwood, N.J., alleging that the bar abused both turtles and goldfish by racing them. 

   A trial judge fined the racing promoters $50 plus court costs for being cruel to the fish, which were taken out of a bowl by hand, and placed in a rain-gutter starting gate. 
"If we'd only moved it with a net rather than our hand, we wouldn't have been accused of cruelty to the fish," says Gary Ferruggia, owner of Goal Post. 
But the judge permitted the turtle races to continue. 

   Harry Cohen, who races turtles at the Goal Post on Wednesday nights down a six-lane, 16-foot track to the strains of "Rocky," says he has shelled out thousands of dollars in court costs for defending himself against animal-rights groups. 
"Racing reptiles, ducks, hamsters, gerbils, baby alligators, bullfrogs and even lobsters -- backwards -- is my thing," says Mr. Cohen. 
Last year he spent a night in jail for "civil abuse of a turtle" he had been racing. 

   In Washington, D.C., last year, radio station WCXR-FM decided to replace two live turtles with mechanical look-alikes after getting complaints about an upcoming turtle race the station was sponsoring. 

   The station had planned to use the race to promote a concert by a 1960s rock group called the Turtles (hit song: "Happy Together"). 
"But we decided that using live turtles wasn't worth the aggravation," says Mark Lapidus, the station's promotion manager. 
"Some protesters complained that we were disturbing the psyche and consciousness of the animals." 

   Turtles face even bigger dangers than racing. 
In the western Mojave Desert, they now are used as target practice by civilians and their habitat was once a bombing range for the Air Force. 
"If we killed any tortoises, we weren't aware of it and didn't purposely do it," says a spokesman for George Air Force Base in southern California. 
For almost two decades, bombers from the base dropped practice or small-explosive bombs on a nearby area where the tortoises live. 

   "We stopped in 1982 because the area is too close to a busy highway to Reno and Lake Tahoe," says the spokesman. 
He says the Bureau of Land Management had assured the base that a lot of tortoises didn't live there. 

   Kristin Berry, a biologist with the Bureau of Land Management, says that in California's Fremont Valley, less than 70 of 200 tortoises seen in 1981 in a sample mile-square area are still alive. 
"Many were shot, some had their backs pounded in or were run over by off-the-road vehicles," she says. 
"In other areas of the desert, the turtles are being taken for food or as pets." 

   For as long as turtles have been around, their main defense has been their shells, which haven't always made them as impervious to attack as turtle lovers would like. 
Because all turtles are ectothermic -- their blood takes on the temperature of their surroundings -- they must bask in the sun, on rocks or on high ground. 

   For this reason, U.S. desert turtles are easy prey for ravens, which divebomb them and break open their shells. 
The ravens had become such a threat that the Bureau of Land Management planned to poison them. 
But the Humane Society of America got a court ban against it last month in California. 

   "Whatever the government does in regard to protecting endangered animals, it hears about it," says Thomas Wilson, information officer for the Department of Interior. 
When the Department protected the spotted owl, the lumber industry complained it was putting thousands of people out of work because of a ban on cutting down the trees in which the owls nested. 
The shrimp industry is currently complaining about a requirement that shrimpers fit their nets with devices that permit sea turtles to escape because the industry says it's losing too much shrimp. 

   "Now that we're protecting the desert tortoise, wait and see all the people who'll complain about it," says Mr. Wilson. 
Steve Robinson, acting director of the Fish and Wildlife Services, says cattle ranchers are angry because protecting the tortoise could hinder the ranchers' grazing rights on federal lands. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
