ID: 317	RANK: 44	SCORE: 5.581371
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870408-0159 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Women Gymnasts Defunded
---
By Ruth Rudner</HL>
<DD> 04/08/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Bozeman, Mont.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The gymnast stands at the beginning of her run for the vault, her concentration powerful, her entire body focused. 
Arms up, then down at her sides, she runs fast, faster, toward the horse, springs high before it, turns heels over head, arms straight down so that one hand touches the horse lightly, briefly, almost in passing. 
Then, still in the air, she is away from the horse and twisting, somersaulting. 
She comes right side up to earth, feet on the mat, arms raised, back arched. 
She is in balance. 
Turning to face the judges, she once again lifts her arms in that grand moment of triumph. 

   She is one of 11 women on the Montana State University gymnastics team. 
The athletes' average age is 19. 
Among them, they have 112 years of cumulative gymnastics experience and more than 80,000 hours of practice. 
Most have been working at their sport since they were eight or nine years old. 

   When sophomore Lisa Riehl set a school record in the floor exercise her freshman year and moved into MSU's all-time top five, she wasn't out to break records. 
"I just wanted to make the traveling team," she said. 
"But it feels good to know my name will always be in the record book." 

   Unfortunately, at MSU the book is closing. 

   Gymnastics, victim of the university's budget crunch (along with wrestling and skiing), is being dropped. 
In the past two years it has also been cut from five other of the 80 U.S. colleges with gymnastics programs. 
Gymnastics, it turns out, is expendable. 
If the big sports -- basketball and football -- have a bad year and don't produce enough revenue, gymnastics, or some other minor sport, gets cut. 
Does this mean that, ultimately, college sports are only for the supertall and superpowerful? 

   "We put in as much work as football and basketball players do," Dona Jones, a freshman, and one of the team's stars, says. 
"It's a real shame their losses should result in the loss of our program." 

   Being varsity athletes matters to the women, although they hardly fit the image. 
Most are small, as gymnasts usually are; their strong bodies limber and quick and very feminine; their balance and coordination almost unimaginable. 
A few move like dancers, a talent most obvious in the floor exercise, the fourth event in competition's Olympic order (vaulting, uneven parallel bars, balance beam and floor exercise). 
Choreographing their own dances, which, in a split second, erupt into an athlete's tumbling as the gymnast suddenly turns a series of somersaults and twists in the air, the women move in ways that seem impossible. 
Some, like Riehl and Jones and team veteran Page Jefferson, do it with considerable art. 

   Competing all season with an injured foot, Jones ended her first college season in the No. 2 slot of the team's all-around, all-time top five, was the only MSU gymnast to qualify for the Mid-West Regional Championships at Arizona State in Tempe on Saturday, and is a possible contender for the NCAA national championships in Salt Lake City April 24 and 25. 
Still, she plans to retire from gymnastics rather than transfer, the only hope -- short of last-minute funding -- for those wishing to compete. 
"I'm kind of disappointed, but I have my college career to think of. 
But I've had 11 years of the sport and this was the best, and I'd like to end it on this note." 
Watching her land from the most difficult moves with the softness of a cloud, I long for her to continue. 
Time is all she needs to bring her the maturity to juggle the rigors of sport and academics. 
Time is the only thing that's missing. 

   Jefferson, a junior, holds the school record on the balance beam, a four-foot-high, four-inch-wide beam on which a gymnast must do anything that can be done on the floor. 
What Jefferson does on it is to dance, bringing a perfect balance to this slender board of a stage. 
"The beam is the most challenging. 
It's just you and those four inches. 
It made me happy to break the record on that." 
Jefferson, among the top five all-around gymnasts in the school's history and winner of all-conference honors at this season's Mountain West Conference Championships in Boise, Idaho, feels satisfied with her career. 
"I've got everything out of it I put into it, but I feel sad gymnastics seems to be slipping away as a college sport." 

   Volatile Riehl is not ready for the end. 
"I feel cheated," she says. 
"I came here because I was recruited for gymnastics. 
I'm almost 20 and coaches aren't going to recruit me now and give me a full ride. 
High school gymnastics was my life. 
You never figure you're going to retire. 
I'm not burned out at all. 
I could go on another two or three seasons." 

   All-conference sophomore Jill Beauchamp, who has come through with championship performances in spite of a year plagued with injury and illness, and several others on the team, plan to transfer, so that they can try to live up to the promise coach Dick Foxal sees in them. 

   "This is the best gymnastics team in the history of Montana State," Foxal says. 
"They broke every school team record." 

   ---
   Gymnastics judges award points for risk. 
Risk, combined with grace, skill, discipline and concentration in the body of one woman is somehow breathtaking. 
Like dance, it is what gymnastics is about. 
The MSU gymnasts are happy to take the necessary risks, but their time is running out, here and everywhere. 
A gymnast's life in sport is short. 
The mature body, however young, is too old. 
For the MSU team, life is being cut off even sooner than it has to be. 
This is poignant, and it is wasteful -- of individual MSU gymnasts now and of those who might have followed them in this brave new world of women's sports. 

   Many of us remember when varsity women's sports didn't exist. 
These athletes' fathers may have set school records, but none of them ever thought their daughters would. 
Yet the women themselves take sports for granted. 
"Women's athletics has always been around," Jefferson says, "ever since I have." 

   It seems a particular shame to cut back on something that took so long to get going in the first place. 

   ---
   Ms. Rudner is a free-lance outdoors writer based in Bozeman, Mont. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
