ID: 317	RANK: 90	SCORE: 5.258606
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870127-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> How Colleges Can Cut Costs
---
By Robert V. Iosue</HL>
<DD> 01/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   College administrators become defensive, protective and at times just plain silly in trying to justify costs that have become outrageously high at most of our institutions of higher education. 
Tuition costs at a private college today average about $12,000 a year, with many schools costing as much as $16,000. 
This represents a 104% increase over the past seven years, a period during which the Consumer Price Index rose only 37%. 

   For public colleges the news is no rosier; it is just hidden better because taxes don't have the immediacy of direct, out-of-pocket payments. 
Over the same seven-year period, tuition at public colleges rose about 75%, to $4,350 in 1986 from $2,487. 

   Secretary of Education William Bennett raises the obvious question: Is it worth it? 
He charges that "some of our colleges and universities charge what the market will bear." 
During last week's Senate committee hearing on the administration's $5 billion of proposed cuts in the education budget, Mr. Bennett said, "We are not under-investing in education. 
We are inefficient." 

   President Ernest Boyer of the Carnegie Foundation is another critic. 
"Scrambling for students and driven by marketplace demands, many undergraduate colleges have lost their sense of mission," he says. 

   College administrators and faculty answer critics with a list of standard responses. 
But these myths, however popular in the halls of ivy, don't adequately explain the high costs. 

   --Myth No. 1: The high cost of college is due to expensive equipment, buildings, computers and other items peripheral to education. 
Wrong. 
The single biggest reason for the high cost of college, public institutions as well as private ones, is staff. 
The average college spends more than 80% of its budget on salaries and fringe benefits. 

   --Myth No. 2: The average professor is overpaid. 
Wrong. 
The average professor is under-worked. 
There are more than 450,000 full-time professors teaching in this country's 3,300 colleges, earning an average salary of $31,000 for nine months of work plus numerous breaks. 
How many breaks? 
Ask those parents who paid a huge tuition bill and sent their kids off to college only to find them home again for a fall break, a Thanksgiving break, a long winter break, a spring break . . . well, you get the idea. 

   A few decades ago professors taught 15 credits a semester (about one-half the teaching load of a high-school teacher today) and were expected to engage in research. 
Today, some teach 12 credits, but nine credits is the norm at many colleges. 
In my own state of Pennsylvania, we have a large number of two-year public colleges at which the teaching load is only nine credits a semester; these schools have virtually no research facilities. 

   If professors are capable of doing valuable and original research, it makes sense to limit their teaching loads, but the fact that some professors do valuable research doesn't mean that all of them do. 
Teaching is what many professors do best, and they ought to do more of it, not less. 
Professors ought to be in the classroom for no less than 12 hours a week. 
With the 30-week academic year, that should leave ample time for research. 
Incidentally, 60% of all college faculty have never written or edited a book, and 32% have never published even one journal article. 
Many of those whose names have gotten into print have only one book or article to show for a lifetime of effort. 

   --Myth No. 3: All those college administrators are necessary for the operation of the college. 
Wrong. 
They may be working hard, but there is a lot of bumping into one another. 
Colleges, especially public ones whose costs are subsidized by high taxes, excel in building bureaucracies. 
The president "needs" vice presidents who "need" deans who "need" fleets of associate and assistant deans, most of whom cannot give answers without checking with their superiors. 
The top-heavy bureaucracy we lament in business and government is alive and flourishing in higher education. 

   --Myth No. 4: For college athletics to be useful, they must be expensive. 
Wrong. 
Most colleges, whatever the rating of their sports teams, employ coaches, assistant coaches, trainers, equipment managers and spotters. 
Some even find the money to send their baseball teams and all the attendant staff on spring trips south. 
Bear in mind that these aren't only colleges with Division I teams whose ticket and television sales can cover costs. 
The overwhelming majority are colleges that play small-time sports. 

   The quality of play at these colleges would not be noticeably different if half the staff and most of the accouterments were discarded. 
We have forgotten that sports are for enjoyment and character development, not to drive up the cost of education. 
As with faculty research, we erroneously think big-time athletics should set the tone even if the college is not big-time. 

   --Myth No. 5. 
The government has to come across with more money. 
Wrong. 
Both the federal and state governments are doing a lot now. 
In the 1985-86 academic year, federal aid reached $9.4 billion and is slated to top $9.8 this year. 
In 1980, 60% of all students received some federal aid, compared with only 23% in 1970. 
In addition to federal subsidies, public institutions receive state tax dollars, which usually average between 50% and 70% of a public college's budget. 
If taxes and student payments are combined, the cost of public colleges equals or in many cases exceeds that of private colleges. 

   The single biggest reason the cost of college is so high is declining and insufficient productivity as defined by the number of students taught by the faculty and serviced by the administration. 
But there is an alternative. 
If we have the audacity to question medical costs and the nerve to ask the Defense Department to cut waste, might we not suggest that our nation's colleges get a good day's work for a dollar spent? 

   Boards of trustees ought to carefully examine the size of the administration at their colleges. 
This is a tough assignment because trustees are never entirely in the know. 
The president and his team can present a pretty convincing argument for a lot of things. 
Some even persuade their boards to raise tuition just to stay in step with the competition, thereby confounding conventional wisdom that says the competition keeps the price down. 

   Some presidents and deans put on parade the two or three faculty members who do prominent research and leave the board and the public with the impression that all of the faculty is heavily engaged in such activities, thereby relegating teaching to a lesser priority and commitment of time. 

   For those who argue that quality costs money, I agree wholeheartedly. 
I just happen to think that quality is a full-time calling, not a part-time job. 

   ---
   Mr. Iosue is president of York College of Pennsylvania. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
