ID: 236	RANK: 2	SCORE: 35.769638
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881031-0042 </DOCNO>
<HL> Real Witches Today Don't Stew Newts, Not in Wisconsin --- Selena Fox's Coven Prefers Baked Lasagna, and Rites Show Ecological Fervor </HL>
<AUTHOR> Scott McMurray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> BRIGHAM TOWNSHIP, Wis.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Cloaked in a brown woolen poncho and cap, Selena Fox stands in the center of a stone circle. 
Gray clouds bear down on the hilltop site, threatening rain. 
A chill wind howls through the woods here behind her farmhouse. 
Arms raised, she and her audience of three shake gourd rattles and chant exhortations to the elements -- earth, air, fire and water. 

   Tonight the moon will be full. 
Now it's the witching hour. 
Ms. Fox is the witch. 
The audience -- except for me -- is her coven. 
And this is witchcraft, circa 1988. 

   "May humankind stop polluting the waters and may all ocean dumping stop," she prays to the west wind. 

   Witching has come a long way since Shakespeare's crones cackled of evil deeds and wagged their gnarled fingers at Macbeth. 
Ms. Fox, 39 years old, is a high priestess of the new witchery, known to its familiars as the wiccan religion -- wiccan being an ancient word for witchcraft. 

   Its following of 100,000 people, male and female, includes bankers and a tugboat captain; a survey of the faithful showed that computer-company employees make up the biggest single occupational group. 

   Most of these witches are still in the broom closet. 
Now as ever, a witch's lot is not a happy one. 
Witches face firing and housing discrimination, and only on Halloween can they act like others in public. 

   Ms. Fox and her husband and fellow witch, Dennis Carpenter, bought their 200 acres here after their landlord evicted them for being witches five years ago. 
Ms. Fox won't give the names of her coven members, except for her husband and her assistant, to ensure their privacy. 

   Like other religionists, Ms. Fox complains of apathy among her flock. 
"A lot of Christians only go to church on Christmas and Easter," she says, "and a lot of pagans only come out on Halloween." 

   Halloween, on the wiccan calendar, is also New Year's Eve, following Celtic tradition. 
Doctrinaire covens, such as Samantha River's Reformed Congregation of the Goddess in nearby Madison, hold that this Halloween is New Year's Eve of the year 9988. 
The year one of this calendar supposedly began at the dawn of agriculture. 
Ms. River, whose witch-name is Jade, claims about 125 members, all of them women. 
"Sorry," she says, "no men allowed." 

   Ms. Fox is one of the few witches with a public presence. 
She speaks at colleges and elsewhere, explaining that witchcraft is pre-Christian nature religion, not Satanism or black magic. 
She even addressed a World Council of Churches meeting on spirituality last summer. 

   "We're white witches. 
Think of Glenda, the good witch of the North in the Wizard of Oz," she tells audiences. 
Her coven, Circle Sanctuary, publishes a quarterly newspaper and maintains a legal nonprofit status. 

   Ms. Fox recently updated the chapter on witchcraft in the Army chaplain's handbook. 
Among other things, it tells chaplains that wiccans prefer cremation -- oddly enough, in the light of history. 

   Frank Medina, a Beloit policeman who serves on a state committee on cults and gangs, says, "I've gone to her rituals to see what's going on. 
They are a very open, almost childlike group. 
The problem is, people see witchcraft, Satanism and the occult as all the same thing." 

   "Selena runs the prime networking organization in the craft," says Margot Adler, a wiccan high priestess, National Public Radio reporter and author of "Drawing Down the Moon" -- the bible, so to speak, of contemporary witchcraft. 

   Last June, Ms. Fox performed a legal wedding ceremony on Martha's Vineyard for Ms. Adler and her groom. 
They didn't call it a wedding; in witch circles it is known as a "handfasting." 
This is believed to be the first to make the society pages of the New York Times. 
The handfasters jumped over a broom for good luck. 

   Otherwise, wiccans seem pretty ordinary. 
They were raised in more conventional religions -- Ms. Fox as a Baptist -- and discovered witchcraft on their own. 
As a child, she had several "mystical experiences," and beginning in graduate school served several apprenticeships under wiccan priestesses. 
She is a practicing psychotherapist as well as a priestess. 

   In addition to moon rituals, wiccans celebrate pagan seasonal holidays, some of which correspond to more modern innovations. 
The winter and summer solstices are both observed. 
So are ground hog's day, the mid-point of winter; May day, for fertility and planting; an August crop festival and, of course, Halloween. 

   Circle Sanctuary celebrates Halloween in two parts. 
The first is a private ceremony to remember and honor the recent dead. 
Occurring as plants die back in the temperate zones of the Northern Hemisphere, the holiday is a "thin time," when the living draw closest to the dead. 
Members also make the equivalent of New Year's resolutions for better lives in the year ahead. 

   High purpose concluded, witches begin the fun in the second part, a harvest and "samhain" -- Celtic for New Year's -- festival. 
It started in pre-Christian Europe with the leaving of treats on platters for dead relatives. 
Families too stingy to leave treats risked being haunted, or tricked, by the disappointed spirits, Ms. Fox says. 
Circle Sanctuary's wiccans attend a come-as-you-were party dressed as they think they dressed in a previous life, or as they dress in fantasy. 
This year Ms. Fox may get herself up as Lady Liberty to express her commitment to freedom of religion. 

   There will be a potluck dinner. 
No strange stews, mind you. 
"The dishes at wiccan dinners tend more toward baked lasagna than eye-of-newt soup," says Charlene Suggs, Ms. Fox's assistant. 

   The group performs rituals for special occasions. 
Circle Sanctuary did its part to fight the drought last summer with dancing and chanting. 
Coincidence perhaps, but within 48 hours, Ms. Fox says, it rained here. 
Then there was a ritual to help end the recent fires in Yellowstone National Park. 
"Maybe it was a coincidence, but they had their first snowfall the next day," Ms. Suggs says. 

   Theodore Arneson, chairman of the nearby Barneveld State Bank, negotiated the contract for the purchase of the farm by Ms. Fox and her husband. 
"She told me they were witches up front. 
I have no misgivings whatsoever," he says. 

   Mr. Arneson recalls that when a tornado devastated the nearby village of Barneveld in 1984, "she was up there in her Red Cross uniform the next day serving soup. 
She is a remarkable person in my opinion." 

   Others hereabouts seem bothered and bewildered. 
Shortly after moving onto the farm, Ms. Fox and Mr. Carpenter started improving their barn. 
Then they were told by zoning officials that they needed a zoning variance. 
Two days before a public hearing on the variance, a local fundamentalist church held a meeting and showed a movie about Satanism and the occult, with warnings about the evils of witchcraft. 

   At the hearing, a crowd jeered at the wiccans and grilled them about their religion for several hours. 
On both sides, the hearing quickly became known as the "Barneveld witch hunt." 

   For the past two years, the American Civil Liberties Union, citing freedom of religion concerns, has provided Ms. Fox with free legal services in the zoning dispute, which still isn't resolved. 

   Ms. Fox's farm straddles hills that were bypassed by glaciers in the Ice Age. 
Craggy rock formations held spiritual powers, according to Indian tribes that once roamed the area. 
Scandinavian settlers also felt the vibes. 
The village of nearby Mount Horeb is dotted with troll statues that harken to pre-Christian Northern Europe. 

   Ms. Fox says that on her first tour of the farm she was drawn straight up the hill to the site where her coven is constructing its stone circle. 
At each meeting the coven adds to the circle, about 40 feet in diameter and less than a foot high. 
Especially on the west, or "water" side, seashells lie in the rocks. 
North represents the earth, east the wind and fire the south, to round out the wiccan compass. 

   At the site, we join hands and rotate clockwise, chanting, "We are a circle, within a circle, with no beginning, and never ending." 
The coven blesses rocks and adds them to the pile, and the chant continues: "We are stewards of the land, we are healers." 

   A half-hour after the rites conclude, the sky clears and the sun comes out, as if by our summons. 

   Probably it is a coincidence. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
