ID: 236	RANK: 40	SCORE: 10.038687
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880329-0082 </DOCNO>
<HL> Labor Letter: A Special News Report on People And Their Jobs in Offices, Fields and Factories </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jeanne Saddler </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR </CO>
<IN> FIN PHA </IN>
<TEXT>
   MOVING TECHNICAL WORKERS away from big cities can be difficult. 

   Fleet/Norstar Financial Group in Providence, R.I., recently failed to persuade several data processing executives to move to a new center in Florence, S.C. 
Some companies lose a third of their senior technical people in such moves, says Edward Perlin Associates, a consultant. 

   Planning helped PaineWebber Group Inc., which lost only 1% of a group of technical workers instead of the 50% it feared when moving the employees to New Jersey from New York. 
The company granted one-time 10% salary bonuses and operates its own commuter vans. 
When Equitable Life Assurance Society moved data processing workers to Leonia, N.J., from New York, it offered cut-rate mortgages and flexible work schedules. 
Everyone moved. 

   Senior staffers may refuse to move because they have many options in the job market and their families have community ties, Perlin says. 

   MORE "RABBI TRUSTS" were used to safeguard deferred pay last year. 

   The trusts, so named because a synagogue first came up with the idea, began gaining favor in 1986 when managers became worried their benefits could be jeopardized by hostile takeovers. 
Some 63 major companies now offer them, up from 17 in 1986, says Hewitt Associates, consultants. 

   But there's still some risk for executives. 
Creditors can claim the money held in rabbi trusts after a bankruptcy. 
So along came so-called secular trust funds, which can't be tapped by creditors. 
Unlike in a rabbi trust, an employer's contributions to a secular trust and the trust's earnings are taxable income immediately for the employee. 
But companies often subsidize this tax bite. 

   DOCTORS DEBATE whether residents' long work hours affect patient care. 

   In the wake of a New York teen-ager's death after her late-night admission to a hospital, some physicians responsible for training doctors argue that long hours aren't to blame for mistakes. 
Others agree with studies saying that limiting residents to 80-hour weekly service would reduce stress. 
The now-average 100 weekly hours are traditional, and some doctors deem them necessary to learn the course of a disease. 

   Nursing shortages and poorly trained graduates of foreign medical schools are more important causes of inadequate patient care, Dr. Norman Levinsky of Boston University Medical Center writes in the New England Journal of Medicine. 
States should provide funds for extra staff, argues Dr. Robert Glickman of Columbia University. 

   City hospitals need different staffing solutions than those with few evening admissions, doctors agree. 

   MANUFACTURERS AND MBA students will discuss careers during a University of Chicago Business School conference in April. 
Black Monday means fewer MBA grads seek Wall Street jobs, but many still fear that manufacturing concerns offer slow advancement. 
Richard Thain, the school's dean, says it is a shame to see MBAs with technical backgrounds selling bonds rather than working for manufacturers. 

   NEW PAY SYSTEMS such as gain sharing -- distributing companywide bonuses based on productivity growth -- are popular with employees when they emphasize both managers and workers' roles, says a study of 425 concerns by Hay Group consultants. 
But systems aimed only at cost-cutting, such as two-tier pay plans, fail to win favor. 

   QUALITY BOARDS: The number of companies whose directors include chief executive or chief operating officers of other firms has risen to 83% from 74% in the past year, says the annual study of boards by Korn/Ferry International, consultants. 
Directors' average compensation is $25,720, including committee fees. 

   CHILD-CARE AID is offered by only 12 states, says a study of state employee benefits for 1988 by Workplace Economics, a Washington, D.C.-based labor analysis firm. 
Forty-four states grant unpaid maternity leave, while 31 provide unpaid paternity leave. 
Many states said their workers are allowed to use paid vacation and sick leave time for parental leave. 

   WOMEN INCREASE their numbers and reputations as salespeople. 

   Dow Chemical Co.'s industrial sales staff is 15% women, up from 10% five years ago. 
American National Insurance Co., Galveston, Texas, doubled the saleswomen it employs in the same period. 
McCormick &amp; Co. of Hunt Valley, Md., says women account for 29% of its sales force, compared with 15% in 1985. 
A McCormick vice president attributes women's gains at the company to "a deep-rooted work ethic and a strong desire for success." 

   About 20% of all new hires in non-retail sales are women, says a survey by Sales Consultants, a division of Cleveland-based Management Recruiters International. 
Survey respondents claimed saleswomen have more of a work ethic than salesmen and offer clients more service, says Alan Schonberg, Sales Consultants' president. 

   Some executives say there aren't any sex-based differences among good salespeople. 
"You just have to be tough and smart," a Dow official says. 

   THE CHECKOFF: Democratic presidential candidates Dukakis and Jackson both were favored over Vice President Bush in a Communications Workers of America poll. . . . 
A Canadian priest in the religion of Wicca, or witchcraft, must be given religious holidays off, an arbitration board rules in Ontario. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
