ID: 236	RANK: 86	SCORE: 8.108645
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881020-0121 </DOCNO>
<HL> Black Magic Casts A Deepening Spell Over Troubled Haiti --- Natives Seek Solace in Spirits, Gods and Bizarre Rituals; Scars of a Killing Rain </HL>
<AUTHOR> Charles McCoy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LATAM </CO>
<DATELINE> PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In Haiti these days, some problems can be solved with magic, and some cannot. 

   Franck Romain is the former mayor of Port-au-Prince. 
He was allegedly a member of the Ton Ton Macoutes, the hated secret police supposedly disbanded after the fall of Jean Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier in February 1986. 
Local legend also holds that Mr. Romain is a voodoo sorcerer who has been entrusted by the spirits with great and frightening magical powers. 

   One recent night, as a vengeful mob surged toward the mayor's office intending to roast him alive for suspected misdeeds, Mr. Romain is said to have cast a spell and rendered himself invisible. 
People here say that he opened a second-story window and soared like an eagle above the rabble, alighting across town at the embassy of the Dominican Republic. 
As the story goes, he then made himself visible in order to seek political asylum. 

   The account is related with matter-of-fact conviction by poor Haitians in stinking slums and even some university-educated professionals. 
Dominican diplomats acknowledge he is at the embassy, in the flesh. 
But for all his magical powers, he has yet to win permanent asylum. 
Mr. Romain could not be reached for comment. 

   Even by the standards of this strange and tragic land, things seem weird. 
There are reports of headless corpses being found in alleyways of the capital. 
In the port of St. Marc, a man is said to have dismembered a Macoute and then burned the limbs in the belief that doing so would make it harder for the dead man to bring himself back to life. 
In Chambellan, a woman is said to be imprisoned after having been denounced by her neighbors for turning children into small animals and eating them. 
In Port-au-Prince, a man thought to have been a werewolf is reported to have been chopped to bits by machete. 

   This much is known to be true: A new general, Prosper Avril, has been in power since a coup last month threw out the old general, Henri Namphy. 
Some Western experts and Haitian political figures express mild hope that the new regime will slow the steady march toward anarchy that began after the end of the despised Duvalier dictatorship. 
But anarchy isn't far off. 

   This is the poorest land in the West, beset by corruption, illiteracy, disease and a history of governments that seemingly have made those conditions policy goals. 
Haiti's problems and peculiarities now seem so towering that the latest political twists probably won't mean much. 
Western notions of progress and development fade in the smoke of a voodoo priest's flaming magic stones. 

   "The ship has sunk," remarks Max Beauvoir, a member of Haiti's intellectual elite and the head of the Association of Voodooists and Defenders of Voodoo. 
"We are all below the water now." 

   Haiti has a reality all its own, and to get a sense of what that means these days, it is best to leave the slums, the careening psychedelic jitneys, and the blaring boom boxes of its capital. 
"In the countryside you will see that Haiti is a mystical land," announces a slender young man in front of the Presidential Palace. 
He is tall, well-dressed, speaks excellent English and carries a French edition of Tolstoy. 
He is one of the few here who have a clear vision of Haiti's future. 

   "There will be a cataclysm of separation," he says. 
By that, he means that Haiti, which shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican Republic, soon will break apart from its neighbor. 
Then it will float across the Atlantic Ocean to be reunited with Africa. 
As he drifts into the fading twilight, he adds: "Do not be arrogant. 
Leave your mind open. 
To understand these matters, go to the countryside." 

   Getting there can be hard, so it makes sense to first consult someone like the voodoo priest of Carrenfour, a Port-au-Prince suburb. 
He is called Duivree. 
He has no nose. 
To a foreigner, his noselessness appears to be the result of leprosy. 
However, everyone in the neighborhood figures he lost his nose during a near-fatal battle with a djab, an evil spirit. 
Now, it is said that Duivree cannot die. 

   Duivree tends to his followers in a dim plaster hut decorated with paintings of Catholic saints and voodoo loas, or spirits. 
Voodoo is a complex system of rights and beliefs drawn from African religions practiced by slaves brought to Haiti in the 1600s. 
"We rarely see a white man here," he says, motioning a visitor into a dark chamber off the main room. 
"Your troubles must be large." 
He wears striped Bermuda shorts and a plaid shirt. 

   He flips greasy playing cards into a clay bowl, confirming his suspicions: "There is a dangerous power holding you back in your career." 
Amazing. 
How did he know? 
He says he can work some serious magic that will take care of the problem forever. 
It will cost $2,500, he says at first, but he eventually agrees to cast a low-budget spell. 

   In the hut, candle shadows dance on skulls of cows. 
Dried fish dangle from the ceiling. 
A rooster clucks. 
A basin holds the blood and bones of something. 
Duivree bathes the visitor in potions: some rum, some herbs, some dark, viscous gook. 
We go to the basement, where he knocks on a casket and says some words in a lost African language. 
The spell, he says, will keep evil at bay for at least six months. 

   "That will be helpful, since you are going to the countryside," Duivree explains. 
"There are many troubles and many mysteries out there now." 

   Things are so out of balance in Haiti that even the rain is troublesome. 
In 1923, 63% of the country was forested. 
That's down to 2% now. 
Whole forests have been cut down and sold, or lost to the peasants' slash-and-burn agriculture and their need for charcoal. 
Every cloudburst sluices more precious soil off the scalped land. 
This is creating vast tracts of tropical deserts, barren places where it rains and rains and nothing can grow. 

   The consequences are disastrous. 
There isn't enough arable land for Haiti to feed itself even now. 
And despite years of trying to plant trees and promote soil management techniques, international relief groups have made little headway. 
Sometimes, the new trees don't make it in the poor soil. 
Sometimes, peasants cut them down for firewood as soon as they're planted. 

   The land is dying. 
But Haitians believe the gods know what is best. 
Gustave de La France, an old farmer who lives deep in the bald mountains near Hinche, says: "When it rains, the spirits in the rocks are nourished, so the rocks grow larger." 

   The rocks grow, the land shrinks, the population soars. 
At present rates, Haiti's population will double in about 35 years. 
Western aid agencies press birth control, to little avail. 
One U.S.-funded birth control drive sputtered out a couple of years back when the Haitian doctor in charge of it came to the conclusion that birth control was the white man's way of keeping the black man down. 
On a dirt road near the port of Gonaives, young children gleefully blow up aqua-colored condoms like balloons, laughing as they pop. 

   In some corners of the countryside, the mood now seems surly. 
"The problem is these white pigs," growls Dieuliphete Saint-Fort, a shirtless, shoeless 16-year-old with a machete dangling loosely from his hand. 
"They eat their young. 
I'd like to get rid of them all." 

   Dieuliphete is a pig breeder in a nameless outback village near Pont Sonde. 
On top of everything else, Haiti is suffering the lingering effects of a pig crisis. 
In 1985, African swine flu wiped out the local Creole pigs, a dark-colored breed that needed almost no care. 
Western relief agencies brought in replacements, white pigs mainly from America. 
They died off by the scores from heat and disease. 

   The foreign pigs are beginning to adapt, but Dieuliphete says they're more trouble than they're worth. 
"You have to pamper them like a woman," he scoffs. 
Special feed can run $40 a month. 
Vaccinations can cost $20 a pop. 
"No Creole pig ever needed such care. 
They were strong. 
They were black, like us," Dieuliphete says, smacking his chest. 

   This deep in the countryside, time can lose all meaning. 
A meeting with Andrenor Lundi is set for 3 p.m. in his open-air hut in the town of Cayes Jacmel. 
At the appointed hour, Mr. Lundi, a voodoo priest, is possessed by a god, Calfou, protector of the travelers. 
For more than two hours, Calfou jokes with passers-by and dispenses advice. 

   "Get me some rum," the spirit commands. 

   "Get your own," replies a young woman, giggling. 

   When the spirit departs, it becomes clear that this is a special occasion. 
Mr. Lundi is initiating a new priest and several new voodoo worshipers. 
Among the witches and warlocks present is Madame Nerva, a locally renowned mambo, or priestess, who says she was called to serve after 13 miscarriages. 
"I was praying in the Protestant church when the spirit entered me," she says. 
"I ran out so fast I left my shoes behind." 
Since becoming a mambo, she says she has had "more children than I can count." 

   The worshipers twirl and twitch to the call of the drums. 
Mr. Lundi bites the head off a live chicken and is taken over again by loas. 
A dance to summon the Macandal, an especially dangerous set of spirits, is cut short because Mr. Lundi senses "things are verging on the uncontrollable." 
Several people are possessed. 
Magic rocks burst into flames. 
Rum flows. 
Through curious circumstances, a reporter is given the rare honor of becoming godfather to a newly initiated holy man who can turn people into zombies. 

   Many Haitians think some of the worst of their crises revolve around voodoo. 
Protestant missionaries and some Haitian intellectuals decry voodoo as anti-modern. 
A young group of radical Catholic priests wants to wean its followers away from voodoo; for centuries, the two religions have existed as sort of complementary creeds, with voodoo rites grafted on to Catholic ritual. 
The radical priests are denounced by many as Communists. 

   The Association of Voodooists says 1,500 followers have been killed by persecutors since 1986. 
Some followers have been converted to Christianity, though not always for the reasons its proselytizers would hope. 
"I became a Christian after the voodoo people killed my mother with a death spell," explains Gustave Pierre, a 22-year-old former soldier. 
"They were jealous of her. 
She was a ju-ju mystic." (Ju-ju is another magical religion with African roots.) 

   The voodooists say they will prevail in the end. 
Voodooo is all the people have left, they say. 
As many as two-thirds of Haiti's 6.2 million people are believed to be voodooists. 
Spirits may be the only solace in a land where the average person earns $350 a year and can never expect to have enough to eat. 

   "We are all children of the drum," explains Madame Nerva, the mambo. 
"Without voodoo, we would drown in our misery." 
She sings the magic songs to summon the spirits once more. 
Whatever its problems, Haiti is one of the last places on earth where a traveler can still share a glass of rum with a god. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
