ID: 216	RANK: 40	SCORE: 9.683373
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881006-0151 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Books: U.S. and Israeli Gunslingers; an Albanian Mystery </HL>
<AUTHOR> David Brooks </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   You'd never catch Rambo attending a writers' convention, but writers often tag along with fighting men, and when they do, the results vary. 

   On the plus side there is Larry McMurtry's latest, "Anything for Billy" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 382 pages, $18.95), about a middle-aged Philadelphia novelist who skips out on his wife and nine daughters to roam the Wild West with Billy the Kid. 
Billy is the first myopic, manic-depressive gunfighter I can remember reading about. 
He bounces across the dusty hamlets of the Southwest, sometimes happy, sometimes low, shooting off his gun -- and occasionally hitting somebody. 
Billy is no marksman owing to his eyes, which water up when he tries to aim, but he doesn't skimp when it comes to using ammunition. 

   He is a casual killer -- he kills children and bystanders with neither a first nor second thought. 
He also is a child himself, and when he is up he's a playful colt. 
Saints and sinners alike find him irresistible. 
One of the saints is the writer Ben Sippy, who is moth to Billy's flame. 

   In principle, I'm against this book. 
Ben Sippy is modernity, a hapless world-weary writer going through a midlife crisis. 
Striking the Prufrockian pose, he worries about his decaying body, the romances he passed up as a youth, the timidities of his life. 
Everybody else rides around on a horse; he's kvetching about his finicky mule. 
Everybody else is a gunman; he faints at crucial moments. 
They worry about flying lead; he's got angst. 
It's as if a Saul Bellow protagonist trotted out to narrate Custer's last stand. 

   The pioneers had it rough enough; they didn't need some schlemiel moping around -- some exile from the 20th century making a joke out of Western lore. 
Nevertheless, Mr. McMurtry is such a beguiling storyteller one is willing to rise above principle and like this book. 
"Anything for Billy" is pure pleasure, though if some committee to preserve the integrity of the Western is working up a petition against the book I'm willing to sign. 

   ---
   On the minus side of writers tagging along with gunslingers, there is Leon Uris's "Mitla Pass" (Doubleday, 435 pages, $19.95), about a writer who tags along with the Israeli paratroopers as they drop behind enemy lines during the 1956 Sinai War. 
Actually, it is exciting to read this book: Perhaps never before has an accomplished author written a book this terrible -- it's nice to be on hand, if only for the sake of history. 

   "Mitla Pass," which seems to have taken its inspiration from some of the truly awful miniseries of the past, spans the globe in order to come to terms with Big Issues, such as war, literature, the sexual revolution, immigrant roots, Judaism, the Holocaust, communism, Hollywood glitz, success, poverty and the American dream. 
This book is way up there on the Socially Redeeming Scoreboard. 
There's also a lot of sex. 

   Let's sample a single page for a sip of Mr. Uris's gift for hackneyed dialogue. 
On page 44, a young woman is talking marriage to her mom, "Things are different with me and Gideon. 
This is going to be a two-career family," Mr. Uris has her declare, sociologically. 
But Mom just doesn't understand (she's pre-Donahue, after all): "I'm just a plain old Navy wife. 
My career is my man and that's been more than enough for me." 

   Toward the bottom of the page, the bride-to-be gets a letter from Gideon's father, who is Jewish. 
If you punch the words "Jewish" and "prospective daughter-in-law" into your Hackneywrite computer program, you wind up with a sentence very much like the one Mr. Uris puts in the letter: "Enclosed are the recipes to make gefilte fish, matzo brie, borscht, gadempta fleysh, tsimmis, etc. when we meet personally I'll give you a test." 

   With so many books to his credit, you'd think Mr. Uris could at least be craftsmanlike. 
This is depressing. 

   ---
   If you read only one Albanian novel this month, make sure it is "Doruntine" (New Amsterdam Press, 180 pages, $15.95), by Ismaile Kadare, translated by Jon Rothschild. 
This is a eerie mystery, set in a superstitious medieval Albanian town. 
A daughter has been married off to a distant village, away for three years and out of touch, when one night she reappears. 
She tells her mother that it was her brother Constantine who brought her back. 
Her mother tells her that Constantine is dead, as are her eight other brothers, killed in a war since the wedding. 
Each tale sends the other into shock. 
Both mother and daughter die. 
Was Constantine resurrected? 
The church authorities are concerned. 
Tales of black magic arouse the people. 
The constable must solve the puzzle. 

   "Doruntine" is exciting for the mystery. 
But its most compelling feature is its medieval setting. 
Mr. Kadare evokes a world in which information does not travel, in which nature is mysterious and menacing, and in which people live in a world of dark, batlike terror. 

   ---
   Hodding Carter has been writing a Viewpoint column for the Journal since the end of 1980, sometimes chiding, sometimes raging at the Reagan era. 
His best Journal columns have now been collected into a single volume, "The Reagan Years" (George Braziller, 202 pages, $17.50). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
