ID: 216	RANK: 54	SCORE: 8.991558
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880425-0165 </DOCNO>
<HL> Forget Disneyland: Some Tourists Like A Really Good Cry --- They Flock to Hemet, Calif., To See 'Ramona' Pageant; Was the Killer a Villain? </HL>
<AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> HEMET, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Tourists by the thousands, fresh from frolicking at Disneyland and gaping at the punkers on Hollywood Boulevard, are trekking to this dusty desert town 90 miles east of Los Angeles. 
They will watch parades, mill past art shows and barbecues and perhaps check out the local beard-growing contest. 

   But mostly, almost 40,000 of them will sit on benches and have a good cry, while 350 local amateurs on a hillside stage act out a story about an Indian's cold-blooded murder here in 1883. 

   It's all part of the Ramona pageant, which during the three weekends ending May 1 turns this otherwise-unsung town into an unlikely tourist attraction. 

   The story of the play, based on an 1884 novel inspired by an actual killing and written by Indian-rights crusader Helen Hunt Jackson, is historically shaky. 
But the pageant itself has unquestionably become part of Southern California's history. 
For "Ramona's" 65-year run here, interrupted only by the Depression and World War II, makes Hemet (pronounced HEMit) home to the oldest continuing American example of a peculiar drama form, the outdoor play. 

   Outdoor productions that combine history, drama, music and dance trace their lineage all the way back to Greek theater. 
But most of them, like the local Indians portrayed in the Ramona story, have vanished. 
In the U.S., Kentuckians still dramatize the lives of Stephen Foster and Daniel Boone, and North Carolinians have a pageant about the Roanoke "Lost Colony." 
Spearfish, S.D., puts on a Passion Play. (The famous German pageant about Jesus' last days, at Oberammergau, is acknowledged to be the world's oldest.) 

   When "Ramona" had its premiere in 1923, pageants were a popular way of attracting tourists by using local acting and musical talent. 
Towns often gave work to itinerant playwrights such as Garnet Holme, a British emigrant who drew upon the novel of the same name. 

   The tear-jerking story may explain this pageant's success, suggests Mark Sumner, the director of the University of North Carolina's Institute of Outdoor Drama. 
Of the pageants remaining, he says, "The tragedies sell the most tickets." 

   The longevity of this particular production, however, seems mostly due to the participants' enthusiasm and ability. 
Critic Alan Rich has called the play "a terrific piece of outdoor entertainment" -- owing, he says, to "an exceptional level of local performing talent for so isolated an area." 
As refined over the past 20 years by directors Maurice and Hilda Jara, "Ramona" has evolved into a slick production. 
Well marketed around Southern California's other tourist spots, the six performances regularly sell out the 6,600-seat Ramona Bowl at a top ticket price of $15. 

   Yet it's something of a mystery why the Ramona legend, which paints a distinctly unflattering picture of the local settlers, ever developed its strange attraction for people hereabouts in the first place. 

   The story -- entirely fictional except for the murder itself -- tells of the half-Spanish, half-Indian bride of Alessandro, a member of the Cahuilla tribe. 
To live with her husband, Ramona forfeits her pampered existence and her inheritance. 
Then, their land is appropriated by white men, their child dies, and Alessandro is shot to death for mistakenly riding a settler's horse. 
The real Indian woman whose husband was killed -- the novelist made up the name Ramona -- witnessed the tragedy. 
But the killer was freed after a trial in the nearby town of San Jacinto because the law at the time barred a squaw from testifying. 

   Around the turn of the century, both this Indian widow and her husband's admitted killer, who contended that he fired in self-defense, still lived here and allowed visitors to take their photographs for money. 
Local landowners, jealous of the land boom an hour's drive away in Palm Springs, apparently didn't notice the irony of promoting a story so critical of their forebears. 
They created a sort of "Ramonaland" to capitalize on tourist interest in it -- and eventually commissioned the first pageant. 
The story was popular in the early 1900s and inspired a song and three movies, including a 1936 version starring Loretta Young. 

   Locals today retain this attachment to the Ramona myth, while remaining almost oblivious to the negative portrayal of their valley. 
"Nobody seems to mind that it makes the pushy white man look bad, because they think it's part of history," says R.L. "Dusty" Bowen. 

   Mr. Bowen played the Indian's killer for 28 years and once described his character in public as "a mean guy." 
He was quickly rebuked by a woman who claimed to be the grandniece of the real killer, Sam Temple. 
"She didn't act like he was a hero, but she didn't seem to think he was a villain, either," Mr. Bowen recalls. 

   "What these people are celebrating," says Kevin Starr, a San Francisco writer on California history, "is not true history but historical legend. 
It's very common in American fiction to take very violent events like the killing of Alessandro or violent people like Billy the Kid and sentimentalize them through legend." 

   The modern production is only part of a post-Easter whirl directly involving about a thousand of Hemet's 31,000 residents. 
Some who aren't growing beards, parading or working on the town's Old West exhibit are combing the hills around the amphitheater to clear out the rattlesnakes. 

   "It's amazing to see so many people working so hard for nothing," says a former Angeleno now living here. 

   The two lead roles occasionally go to outside pros -- the 1959 Ramona was played by a then-obscure actress named Racquel Tejada, who later changed her last name to Welch. 
But to qualify for other positions, cast members must live in the area. 
This year's Ramona is Terry Gross, a local title-insurance examiner. 

   The performers, of course, find their own reward in the spotlight. 
"Being an actor sure beats working," says Watson Gilmore, a retired sheriff's deputy who plays a crotchety ranch overseer. 

   "I sign autographs for all the kids around here," says Edward Grinde, a supermarket butcher. 
A stunt man in the production, he stands in for bookstore-owner Frank Ferro -- playing the Indian Alessandro -- in his perilous death scene. 
From the top of a cliff on one side of the small canyon that serves as the theater, Mr. Grinde plummets 30 feet to the ground, then tumbles down a steep path. 

   As might be expected, things sometimes go awry. 
Once, several years ago, Mr. Grinde was knocked unconscious. 
Another time, the blanks in the murderer's gun failed to go off; he had to yell "Bang" so that the stunt man knew to begin falling. 
Once, after mattresses were placed beneath the rock to soften his landing, the supposedly fatally wounded Alessandro bounced back into view. 
And once, Frank Sorrell -- as Alessandro -- had to take the dive himself after his stunt man fell asleep in the sun; Mr. Sorrell got away with only a few scrapes and a mouth full of dirt. 

   Through all the excitement, though, Elmer Grohs takes the production in stride. 
Now 82 years old, Mr. Grohs has played a singing sheepshearer in 60 of the "Ramona's" seasons. 
And as he sees it, "We're just a bunch of plain old people puttin' on a play." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
