ID: 216	RANK: 84	SCORE: 7.902601
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880907-0107 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Way, Way Off the Beaten Track </HL>
<AUTHOR> Edward Dolnick </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   If you want to wait in line to climb the Statue of Liberty or the Washington Monument, go ahead. 
But take a minute to consider visiting some tourist spots off the beaten track. 
Way off. 

   How about the Barbed Wire Museum in La Crosse, Kan., where you can see a 72-pound bird's nest that crows built almost exclusively of barbed wire? 
Or the Boll Weevil Monument in Enterprise, Ala., which proclaims itself, "The Only Monument in the World Glorifying a Pest!"? 
How about the Barbie Doll Hall of Fame in Palo Alto, Calif.? 

   In "Weird Wonderful America: The Nation's Most Offbeat and Off-the-Beaten-Path Tourist Attractions" (Macmillan, 265 pages, $8.95), Laura A. Bergheim provides descriptions of some 200 eccentric museums, shrines and natural wonders that most of us would never happen on without her help. 

   Ms. Bergheim's excellent guidebook is laid out as if in emulation of the tourist attractions she celebrates, with junk and gems all tossed together. 
There is a semblance of organization -- entries are grouped geographically and alphabetically -- but there is no telling what surprise lurks around the next page. 
The Voodoo Museum is followed by the Checkers Hall of Fame; the National Atomic Museum, with such grim artifacts as the "Fat Boy" and "Little Man" bombs, shares a page with the Smokey Bear Museum; the Wilhelm Reich Museum and the Babe Ruth Museum confront each other across successive pages. 

   The danger here, which Ms. Bergheim avoids, is being self-consciously cute. 
Instead, she is boundlessly curious, funny but not sarcastic, and protective of her finds. 
Her credo becomes clear in her description of North Carolina's tiny Belhaven Museum, where the exhibits range from a dress that belonged to a 700-pound-woman to eyeglasses for a horse to a 100-million-year-old walrus tusk. 
"If a thing exists, then its very existence gives credence to its worth: this is the lesson of Eva Way's museum," Ms. Bergheim writes. 
"If all of life itself were crammed into one little room, it might look a lot like this." 

   The Michelin guidebooks reserve their highest praise for tourist lures that are "worth a trip." 
Few of Ms. Bergheim's sites qualify, though many rate a detour. 
If I ever find myself near Athens, Ga., for example, I will make a point of checking out two of Ms. Bergheim's finds. 

   First, I'll go to see The Tree That Owns Itself, an oak at the corner of Dearing and Finley streets. 
One W.H. Jackson was so fond of the tree, local legend has it, that he willed it "entire possession of itself and of the land within eight feet of it on all sides." 

   Then it's off to the Athens City Hall to inspect an invention that the city itself proclaims, "One of Athens' most cherished memorabilia . . . a totally unique failure." 
This glorious blunder was a double-barreled cannon built during the Civil War, designed to fire two cannonballs at once. 
An eight-foot-chain between the cannonballs was intended to flatten the enemy. 
The one time the cannon was fired, the chain snapped and one cannonball "killed a cow in a distant field, while the other knocked down the chimney from a log cabin." 

   The museums and shrines tend to describe themselves in superlatives, though some of the boasting is not as impressive as was intended. 
A Bristol, Tenn., museum, for instance, bills itself as the "World's Only Guitar-Shaped Music Museum." 
Fort Sumner, N.M., calls itself the "International Billy the Kid Capital." 
Lucas, Kan., brags that its collection of concrete statues of Biblical figures is "the only place in the world where you can see the Garden of Eden and buy Brant's bologna." 

   Some of Ms. Bergheim's finds seem too quirky to be captured in a brief summary. 
"If you're into circuses, condensed milk, train wrecks, or salt and pepper shakers, this small museum is for you," she writes gamely, trying to describe Brewster, N.Y.'s Southeast Museum. 

   On the other hand, if the prospect of such variety makes you dizzy, consider going to Johnson City, Tenn., to see The Museum of Ancient Brick. 
See bricks from Egypt, from Babylon, from Jericho, inside a giant (you guessed it) brick building. 

   Many of the museums were founded by enthusiasts whose collecting zeal started off as single-minded and skidded right off the road into full-fledged obsession. 
The World O' Tools Museum has an exhibit of 1,500 adjustable wrenches. 
There is a Museum of Beverage Containers, a Cookie Jar Museum, a Paperweight Museum. 

   The weirdest tourist site of all? 
No contest -- it's the Cypress Knee Museum in Palmdale, Fla. (Look for the unpunctuated and unmistakable highway sign, "LADY IF HE WON'T STOP HIT HIM ON THE HEAD WITH A SHOE.") 

   Cypress knees are strange bits of wood that "grow around cypress trees like upwardly mobile mutant roots." 
They take on fanciful shapes ("Hippo wearing a Carmen Miranda hat"), and they are, a sign at the museum entrance proclaims, "Souvenirs of a Time Before Civilization Covered the United States." 

   ---
   Mr. Dolnick writes, usually about science, in Chevy Chase, Md. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
