ID: 102	RANK: 53	SCORE: 21.720253
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871223-0169 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Wee Swimmer Makes Splash in Fast Lane
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 12/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> ORLANDO, Fla.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   When one thinks of swimmers one usually thinks of tall, broad-shouldered types with slim hips and long arms. 
Big hands also fit the picture, the better to paddle the human canoe swiftly through the water. 

   What, then, is Janet Evans doing setting all those records? 
The pixieish, 16-year-old high school junior from Placentia, Calif., near Anaheim, stands 5-feet-4 and weighs 97 pounds soaking wet, her usual condition. 
Her shoulders and arms are proportional, and her hands are so tiny she has trouble finding rings that fit. 

   "When people who don't know me learn that I'm an athlete, they assume I'm a gymnast," she notes with a girlish giggle. 
"Even some people who see me around a pool assume that." 

   When Evans gets in the water, though, misconceptions vanish. 
More often than not, she's the one in front. 
On Sunday evening at the U.S. Open swimming championships here, the first dip of major international competition leading to the Summer Olympics at Seoul, she swam the 400-meter freestyle in 4:05.45, almost a full second under the world's record for the distance, which had stood for nine years. 
The next night she set a meet mark in the 400-meter individual medley, putting enough water between herself and her nearest competitors -- world-class swimmers all -- to float a Mississippi River barge. 

   She swam the 800-meter freestyle here last night, and a world mark in that event wouldn't shock anyone because she broke that record in July, only to see an East German lower it in August. 
She also holds the world's standard for the 1,500-meter freestyle, which isn't being contested here. 
Four individual-event Olympic medals -- including a gold or two -- are a real possibility for her. 

   The obvious moral is that looks aren't everything, but that misses the point, says Janet's coach, Bud McAllister. 
"People see her smallness, but they miss her strength," he says. 
"The analogy with gymnastics is apt: Like all top gymnasts, she has a tremendous strength-to-weight ratio, and she's getting stronger yet. 
She's about two years behind her age group in general physical development. 
There's no telling what she'll accomplish when she catches up." 

   What has brought Evans this far is the same thing that gets violinists to Carnegie Hall: practice, practice, practice. 
Every morning except Wednesdays and Sundays, she is at the pool at the Fullerton Aquatics Center near her home, doing laps from 5:15 to 7. 
Weekdays she's at school from 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 
Three afternoons a week she puts in a half-hour of weight training. 
Every afternoon save Sundays, she's in the pool from 3:30 to 6 p.m. for more laps. 
Her typical daily swimming load runs to eight or nine miles. 

   Not only does Evans log the miles, but she does so gladly, according to her coach. 
"Boredom is the swimmer's biggest enemy in practice, but it doesn't seem to affect Janet," McAllister asserts. 
"She's the most consistent athlete I've ever seen or heard of." 

   Evans says she appreciates the compliment even if it's not wholly earned. 
"Sure, I get bored with practice sometimes. 
Everybody does," she says. 
"I think about homework while I'm swimming, and what I'm going to do that weekend. 
I even sing songs in my head. 
But it's true that I don't slow down. 
I guess I'm the kind of person who can do two things at once." 

   One of the things she always wanted to do was swim, and she says her initiation into the sport preceded her memory of it. 
"My mom says that when I was, like, 1 1/2 years old she used to take me to the Y to watch my brothers swim, and I'd cry that I wanted to go in the water, too. 
I raised such a fuss she finally let me take lessons. 
She says that I paddled around pretty well the first time I got in." 

   Competition and age-group titles followed apace. 
Evans made her bow on the national scene at age 13, and won her first titles at 14 as a 5-foot-2, 85-pounder with braces on her teeth. 
Her first world record, in the 1,500, came a month before she turned 16. 
The braces, by the way, are gone now. 

   Making that progression all the more notable is that her swimming style is far from classic. 
Instead of the gracefully curved armstrokes familiar to Esther Williams fans, she appears to windmill the water stiff-armed. 

   Not to worry, though. 
"Under the water, where it counts most, she's about perfect," McAllister avers. 
"It's just that her hand speed is so great that she doesn't get the elbow bend other swimmers do." 

   Janet has flailed the waves over large chunks of the globe, including Moscow for the 1986 Goodwill Games, Australia for last summer's Pan-Pacific meet, and various stops in Europe. 
She believes that the opportunity for that kind of travel more than makes up for the occasional high school dance she misses to stick to her 8 p.m. training bedtime. 

   Still, she says, she likes to do ordinary teen-age things, like drinking Cokes, gossiping and crawling the malls with her friends. 
"I like it when people treat me normal, and all my friends do. 
I'm really not that big a deal at school. 
About half the kids know I swim, and the other half are too spaced out to care. 
If I was on television all the time, it might be different, but swimming's the kind of sport that only gets a lot of attention during the Olympics, and I haven't been in one yet." 

   That lack likely will be remedied next year, but Janet says it probably won't spell the end of her career as a pool shark. 
She'd like to swim through college and, maybe, beyond. 
"We've got girls out here who are pretty old -- 22 or 23. 
If they can do it, I can, too," she says blandly. 

   "I really can't envision life without swimming," she goes on. 
"A perfect day for me would be to go to Paris with my friends and buy out every store in town, but I'd be sure to finish in time to get in my afternoon workout. 
Otherwise, I'd go to bed feeling guilty." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
