ID: 102	RANK: 65	SCORE: 19.799252
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880919-0085 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Olympics: Going 'Down Under' for the Gold </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Seoul  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "Do I ever hit my head on the wall?" 
Betsy Mitchell, the U.S. entry in the women's 100-meter backstroke, asks, echoing a question she hears a lot. 
"Not lately, because there are flags overhead to let us know when it's coming. 
But I jam my fingers on it once in awhile, and get water up my nose a lot." 

   "The water-up-the-nose part is the worst," chimes in David Berkoff, the U.S.'s 100-meter male. 
"It's not like you can stop and blow it out and then finish the race. 
You have to swallow, and hope it doesn't weigh you down too much." 

   Happy to say, both Mitchell and Berkoff have surmounted the difficulties of their stroke and made it the instrument of their glory. 
The 22-year-old Mitchell, a strapping 5-foot-9 and 150 pounds, holds the world's record (2:08.6) at 200 meters and the American record (1:01.2) at 100. 
The University of Texas education-school graduate took a silver medal in the shorter race at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles, and is a rated strong medal contender in both it and the 4x100-meter medley relay this week. 

   Berkoff, 21, a Harvard anthropology major, is a later bloomer, but stunned swimmingdom at the U.S. Olympic Trials in Austin, Texas, last August by setting the 100-meter world's record of 54.95 seconds in a preliminary, and breaking his own mark with a 54.91 final. 
He did it by swimming the first 35 meters or so of the race underwater while using an undulating, legs-together "dolphin" kick. 

   When the sport's powers-that-be recovered from their surprise, some of them began talking about subjecting the "Berkoff submarine" to the fate of many another sporting innovation, which is to say banning it. 
For the present, though, the technique is legal, and its developer is the favorite in the coming race here against a field that includes the man whose record he broke, the Soviet Union's Igor Poliansky. 

   Berkoff and Mitchell go about their business differently, but both report they got into the backstroke the same way. 
Their coaches made them. 
"My high school team needed backstrokers, and I got the call," says Mitchell, as Berkoff nods agreement. 

   Both also say that, after some initial grousing, they took well to their new assignments. 
"Backstrokers are smarter than other swimmers, and I qualified," smiles Mitchell, who's from Marietta, Ohio. 

   Says Berkoff, a native of Huntington Valley, Pa., who sports a left-ear earring: "I tend to do things backwards anyway, like pulling my shirts inside-out when I take them off, so I guess I fit right in." 

   For a conventional stroker like Mitchell, the key to speed going backwards is shoulder flexibility and a strong flutter kick. 
"We don't get the body turn that freestylers do, so we need more pure arm strength and longer reach," she notes. 
"Also, we have to kick harder, because our legs ride lower in the water than freestylers' do. 

   "Your legs are your tempo-setter," she adds. 
"If you don't maintain a fast beat, you don't get fast-enough arm turnover. 
And then you're not fast, period." 

   Until he headed down under, Berkoff was regarded as fast only for a Harvard man. 
"We have good talent on our team, but we can't spend as much time in the pool as they do at other schools," says the first Harvard Olympian in the sport since 1960. 
"That's why we're always looking for shortcuts." 

   Berkoff's underwater shortcut had been tried by other swimmers before him, but never with as much success. 
He thinks that's because he built up his capacity for it slowly. 

   "My roommate, Jeff Peltier, and I began fooling with it four years ago with our coach, Joe Bernal," Berkoff says. 
"Harvard has a 25-yard pool, and at first we'd stay under for 12 yards before we surfaced. 
Then we took it to 15 yards, and then to an entire length. 
All that time we were learning more about what to do down there. 

   "It works because there's less drag on a swimmer under water than above, and because, when we do surface, we have fresh arms while the other guys have been stroking for awhile. 
You have to be careful about timing, though. 
Stay down too long, and you're no good for anything when you come up." 

   Stay down long and spectators tend to forget you're there. 
"I was told that at the trials, the guy doing TV commentary on the race didn't see anyone in my lane and thought I'd scratched," Berkoff says. 
"He had some explaining to do when I surfaced in first place." 

   And there is much to be said for backstroking even in practice, Mitchell adds. 
"We get to look up, at what's going on, instead of down, into the water," she points out. 
"We can see what kind of a day it is, what other people are doing, and whether or not the coaches are paying attention. 
I think that I would have quit the sport long ago if I'd have stuck to freestyle. 
Either that or freaked out completely." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
