ID: 102	RANK: 9	SCORE: 27.967852
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890807-0100 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890807 </DD>
<AN> 890807-0100. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
@  Teen-Age Girls Star in Off-Year Contest
@  ----
@  By Frederick C. Klein </HL>
<DD> 08/07/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> Los Angeles  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It's quiz time again. 
How many of you can name three famous sporting Blanchards? 

   Of course, there's "Doc" -- real first name Felix -- who won the 1945 Heisman Trophy playing fullback for the U. of Army football team. 
And Johnny, who played catcher and outfield on a lot of the New York Yankees' championship baseball teams of the 1950s and '60s. 
But how about the third? 

   As of last week, you'd have to include Mary Ellen Blanchard, Doc's 16-year-old granddaughter. 
She showed up at the Phillips 66/U.S. 
Swimming Long Course Championships here and came away with a full medal packet: A gold for winning the women's 200-meter breaststroke, a silver for taking second in the 100, and a bronze for a third place in the 200-meter individual medley. 

   Freckled Mary Ellen, from Norcross, Ga., emerged not only bemedaled but also bedecked with praise from none less than Janet Evans, the U.S.'s three-golds aquatic queen of the 1988 Olympics at Seoul. 
Still giggly despite having achieved the advanced age of 17, Evans won four races here, three of them by furlongs instead of body lengths, but edged Blanchard and second-place Summer Sanders, also 16, by only one second and change in the 200 IM. 

   "That was a race]" Evans enthused after the win. 
"It was neat having someone near me at the finish." 
She said she entered the 200, her shortest event ever in a national meet, because she knew that she'd get heat from Blanchard and Sanders. 
She added: "Usually, the kids who do well the year after an Olympics hang around for the next three years. 
That definitely should include Mary Ellen and Summer." 

   That this is, indeed, the first (and usually quietest) year of the four-year Olympic cycle that governs swimming and other sports that come to popular life only quadrennially was apparent from a glance at the meet's surrounding. 
Its site was the 50-meter outdoor pool on the campus of the University of Southern California, where up to 14,000 people crowded high-rise bleachers for the swimming segment of the L.A. Olympics of 1984. 
Now the bleachers are gone, and despite four California-perfect days, the pool's permanent seating of about 2,000 was mostly more than adequate to accommodate the usual complement of parents and teachers. 

   Sad to say, a goodly portion of the throng that showed up on Friday, the final day, went home feeling cheated. 
The day's -- and perhaps meet's -- main event was to be a rematch in the men's 50- meter freestyle between Matt Biondi, the 1988 Olympic titlist and world's record holder, and Tom Jager, the runnerup at Seoul and the ex-record holder. 
But one false start disqualified Jager and another removed Todd Pace, the fourth-fastest qualifier, cutting the field to six. 
And when the race finally did get off, the 6-foot-7 Biondi started a whit slowly, maybe enough to have cost him another mark. 
His winner's time of 22.36 seconds was .22-second over his standard, and he later remarked that his first two starts were better. 

   It's worth noting that the U.S. rule on false starts differs from the international one, which gives fields two misfires before heads are lopped. 
It's also worth noting that a rules issue detracted from another event, the backstroke. 
David Berkoff, a Harvard student, revolutionized that stroke's 100-meter race, and set a world's record last year, by swimming the first 30 or so yards underwater. 
But after the Olympics, the sport's killjoy world governing body, FINA, decreed that, henceforth, backstrokers must surface by the 10-meter mark. 

   The U.S. retains the crowd-pleasing unlimited-underwater rule for domestic use, but used the FINA statute here because the Nationals were the qualifying race for a team that will compete in the international Pan Pacific meet in Tokyo later in the month. 
Still, the no-false-starts rule wasn't altered. 

   "If we went with FINA on the backstroke, why not on the starts, too?" asked Jager afterwards. 
He'd remonstrated with officials after he got the hook -- while fans chanted "Let him swim]" -- but later cooled off and called his disqualification "part of the game." 
No one, however, could answer his question about the rules hodgepodge. 

   As is typical of most post-Olympic-year meets, the swim nationals were contested by a mix of vets and newcomers, and the vets generally posted the best times. 
The stopwatch highlight was a new world's record of 2:12.90 in the men's 200-meter breaststroke by Mike Barrowman, a University of Michigan student who'd finished fourth in the event at Seoul. 
He did it in the Thursday morning prelims, and while his time in the afternoon finals was nearly two seconds higher (he said he got water in his goggles) it still earned him a first. 

   "My mother, father and girlfriend hated me this summer for spending so much time in the pool, but this makes it worthwhile," the slim Barrowman said of his mark. 

   Spending a lot of time in the pool is what swimming is all about. 
It seems like a drag, but some of the returning vets, including Biondi, a seven-medal winner at Seoul, admitted that life without laps wasn't what he thought it might be, so he ended a post-O Game retirement to swim again here. 
Evans, who has grown two inches (to 5-foot-6) since last year and soon will enter Stanford, said she still enjoys being wet even though she hasn't trained as intensively as she did in 1988. 

   But rest assured that the killer instinct of Evans, who plans to stick around through '92, is intact. 
Asked what she thinks about when she turns for home pool-lengths ahead of rivals, she said, "How to get farther ahead." 

   Mary Ellen Blanchard was one of a batch of other teen-aged winners among the women, but if genetics count she well might turn out best. 
Besides grandpa Doc, father Tony and brother Rhett play or played football and mom Barbara and sister Lee Anne are tennis aces. 
"In my family, it's compete or die," she smiles. 
At 5-foot-9 and 127 pounds she has the size of a pool champ, and the proper interests. 
Her hobbies? 
"Music, reading, doing laps." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
