ID: 127	RANK: 56	SCORE: 14.725548
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861203-0100 </DOCNO>
<HL> Anti-Nuclear Movement in Australia
Impedes Efforts to Mine More Uranium
---
By Geraldine Brooks
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/03/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN>
<DATELINE> DARWIN, Australia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Chained to the wharf in Darwin's harbor, the 38-foot ketch Vega seems like a mouse harassing an elephant as it attempts to block the giant British cargo ship Forthbank from docking to take on cargo of uranium ore. 

   "Vega, this is Forthbank pilot," crackles a voice over the radio. 
"I'm going to put this ship alongside in approximately five minutes, I suggest you get your crew fitted out with lifejackets." 

   He then instructs the tugboats to push his towering ship toward the wharf at full speed. 
In the turbulence created by the Forthbank's huge propellers, the Vega bounces against the wharf, snapping part of her steering mechanism. 

   The Vega's skipper, Christopher Bone, unwilling to prolong the risk to his yacht and crew, pulls away from the jetty. 

   The Vega is owned by the international environmental group Greenpeace. 
In the past two years, disruption by Greenpeace and other protestors has delayed uranium shipments here by as much as six days. 
This time, they manage only 14 minutes. 
But within hours of the Forthbank's departure, the Vega crew was meeting to discuss how to delay the next shipment. 

   Australia's uranium industry has long been dogged by such protests. 
The country has an estimated 28% of the West's easily recoverable uranium resources, but it also has an influential anti-nuclear movement that has held back exploitation. 

   The uranium industry's critics argue that mining and exporting uranium contributes to increases in radioactive waste and the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
What's more, many of Australia's richest uranium deposits lie in Kakadu, a major national park and an area of great cultural significance to the country's Aborigines. 

   There are tensions in the ruling Australian Labor Party over the uranium issue, and the government's policy picks a careful path between the demands of the mining industry and the power of the conservation vote. 
Australia doesn't have any nuclear plants, so all of its uranium is mined for export. 
The government limits uranium mining to three sites. 

   The government has prevented the opening of new mines by refusing to grant export licenses for uranium produced at any additional sites. 
But with a trade deficit of $2.1 billion in the year ended June 30, Canberra is coming under increasing pressure to allow additional mines. 
In August it even lifted a ban on sales of uranium to France that had been imposed two years earlier to protest French nuclear-weapons testing in the Pacific. 
Lifting the ban caused an uproar. 
Three Labor members walked out of Parliament, and Prime Minister Bob Hawke's chief political adviser resigned. 

   Several proposed uranium mines are in Kakadu National Park, near the existing Ranger mine, 140 miles east of Darwin, owned by Energy Resources Australia Ltd. 
But the government says no more mining will be permitted there. 
Peko-Wallsend Ltd., which owns more than 42% of Energy Resources, recently tried to pressure the government to allow more mining by moving an exploration drilling rig onto a site within Kakadu. 
The government has taken Peko-Wallsend to court to stop further work there. 
The case is still unresolved. 

   To underline the government's position, Mr. Hawke visited the disputed site this month and declared it would be "an obscenity" to mine an area of such national significance. 
Kakadu's scenic wetlands and abundant wildlife provided the backdrop for "Crocodile Dundee," an Australian film currently showing in the U.S. 

   Two mines, to which the Aborigines agreed, have gone ahead, bringing royalty payments that increased the wealth of a people who were among Australia's poorest. 
But the pace of change brought by mining towns, roads and technology has meant disruption for the Aborigines, many of whom still fish with spears and speak little English. 

   "There won't be any more mining," Mr. Hawke assured Bill Neidjie, an Aboriginal leader. 
But as the prime minister's helicopter clattered away, Mr. Neidjie sat down heavily and shook his head. 

   "Aborigine law, it never changes," he said. 
"But white man's law, it can change any time." 

   Indeed, the opposition Liberal Party says it will overturn the mining prohibition if it wins next year's election. 
Peter Durack, the party's spokesman on minerals, expects the issue to be prominent in the election campaign. 
Mining earns over half of the country's export income, and Australia's trade deficit has strengthened the industry's political voice. 

   By closing off much of Kakadu to further mining, the government could be locking up minerals valued at between $45 billion and $64 billion, according to the Australian Mining Industry Council, though the council concedes exploration isn't sufficient to make an accurate estimate. 

   The miners' attempts to open more uranium mines have the full support of the Northern Territory government, which wants the jobs and the revenue that Kakadu's resources can provide. 
But the federal government is standing firm. 

   "They're cowboys who would mine their grandmother's mouth if there was some gold in it," says Barry Cohen, federal minister for the environment. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
