ID: 127	RANK: 58	SCORE: 14.322846
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870326-0061 </DOCNO>
<HL> Australia Tries to Save Some of
World's Oldest Aboriginal Art
---
By Geraldine Brooks
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/26/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST </IN>
<DATELINE> KAKADU, Australia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Imagine a centuries-old Renaissance masterpiece -- a Raphael, say -- hanging in a famous museum. 
The temperature and humidity are controlled. 
Admiring crowds gather under the watchful eyes of security guards. 

   Now imagine a painting whose age is measured not in hundreds but in thousands of years. 
But picture it exposed to six months of drenching rain and scorched the rest of the year by searing heat. 
Visualize termite tunnels bubbling across its surface and buffalo rubbing itching backs against the pigment. 

   That is the dire condition of thousands of ancient Aboriginal art treasures scattered throughout Kakadu, a 5,000-square-mile national park east of Darwin. 
The park's 6,000 rock paintings, some of them dating back an estimated 30,000 years, are in need of "desperation conservation," says archeologist Hilary Sullivan. 

   Miss Sullivan is standing in a cave, peering at a flake of white paint about to break loose from the rocky wall. 
Above her head, a depiction of the Aboriginal figure known as Lightning Man spreads his legs in a wide leap. 
When he lands, Aborigines say, the axes attached to his ankles strike thunderclaps from the stones. 

   In scuffed hiking boots and a battered Australian bushman's hat, the 33-year-old Miss Sullivan is a far cry from the popular image of a museum curator. 
Nor does the cliff on which she's standing resemble a museum. 

   Yet this rocky gallery and others nearby contain more than 6,000 paintings: an unbroken record of a culture that predated, and outlasted, the civilizations of ancient Egypt, Greece and Rome. 
The paintings are believed to include some of the oldest works of human creativity. 

   With her colleague Ivan Haskovec, a former Czech economist, Miss Sullivan helps the Aborigines care for the ancient treasures of Kakadu, which was the setting for the movie "Crocodile Dundee." 
Much of the park is land owned by the Aborigines and leased to the government since 1979. 
Until then, only a few archaeologists had studied the paintings, and nothing had been done to protect them from the ravages of their tropical environment. 

   Kakadu's vast plains are bisected by an abrupt, precipitous spine of red, black and ochre rock. 
At this time of year, it looms over lowlands awash with silver sheets of water. 

   Aboriginal hunter-gatherers used to shelter in the rocky overhangs of these high cliffs, and it is here that Miss Sullivan and Mr. Haskovec go to work for the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service. 
Every two weeks, a helicopter carries them 12 miles from the park headquarters to the lonely escarpment, returning to collect them 10 days later. 
It is the only way to traverse the flooded plains. 

   In the five years since she came to Kakadu, Miss Sullivan has catalogued and done basic conservation work on some 2,000 paintings. 
She believes each of the remaining 4,000 or so must be found, their locations recorded for posterity. 
"Would the art world say, 'We've got 10 Leonardos now, there might be an 11th, but we won't worry about it?'" she asks. 

   On each trip, she and her partner explore an area of about 2.3 square miles, scrambling up every rock and peering into each crevice to look for paintings. 
They carry a high-speed, dentist-style drill for removing termites' nests, insecticide to discourage reinfestation, silicone cartridges that shoot lines like chewing-gum across the rock to divert rain water, machetes to remove delving tree roots, tripod and cameras to photograph the art. 
Every new site is charted. 

   The two are accompanied by Aborigines who help interpret the paintings. 
"The country is alive for them," Miss Sullivan explains. 
Every rock or tree might be part of a story that links Aboriginal history and religion. 

   Aborigines believe the oldest paintings -- some are estimated to have been completed between 20,000 and 30,000 years ago -- were created by spirits. 
These mimi, or spirit, paintings depict figures running or hunting. 
They often include stencils of tools such as boomerangs or spears that must have been held to the rock wall while red pigment was blown from the mouth on to the surface around them. 

   The paintings use just a few fluent strokes to convey form and movement. 
Brushes were fashioned from the chewed ends of twigs, trimmed feathers or soft swatches of bark used to spread paint like a palette knife. 

   "Some people don't expect to understand this art because it's Aboriginal," says Mr. Haskovec, examining a painting which uses just two or three lines to depict the figure of a man bending protectively over a reclining woman. 
"But if you hear somebody screaming you don't need to know the language to understand the emotion." 

   Rock paintings done in recent centuries are much more embellished than the simple mimi works. 
People and animals are drawn in an X-ray style, with internal bones and organs shown. 
Colors become more various, with black, white and orange pigments added to the earlier reds. 

   A few Aborigines were still doing such paintings on rock shelters as recently as the early 1970s, but the art form declined as Western civilization encroached. 
Some paintings from the past century depict the sailing ships of the early European explorers. 

   Kakadu's isolation slowed the impact of white society, but gradually Aborigines drifted to missionary settlements or cattle stations. 

   "Rock painting, that's all finished now," says Bluey Ilkgarr, an Aboriginal artist. 
Mr. Ilkgarr and many of his contemporaries continue to paint on sheets of bark. 
While white Australians divide the year of the tropical north into two seasons, wet and dry, the Aboriginal calendar lists at least six. 
Next month Gudjewg, or "heavy-rain" season, gives way to Bang-Gereng, or "knock 'em down storms," when fierce winds howl from the southeast. 

   Neither is conducive to art conservation. 
"You're wet for 10 days, basically," says Miss Sullivan. 
Through driving rain or steamy humidity, the team hauls the heavy equipment of conservation up the cliff face. 

   For the 40-year-old Mr. Haskovec, the rock caves of Kakadu are a long way from the office in Prague where he worked as an economist before leaving Czechoslovakia in 1970. 
He spent time on a South American archaeological dig on the way to Australia and decided to return to university to study the subject. 
"Who wants a communist economist?" he asks, grinning. 

   In capitalist Australia, Miss Sullivan worries about lack of government funds for her search-and-rescue missions. 
"It frustrates me, when I think of the money that's spent on paintings in a museum," she says. 
"This art is just as significant aesthetically. 
It just happens to be in the bush." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
