ID: 127	RANK: 78	SCORE: 12.803496
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881005-0138 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Pacific: Stirring Up Trouble in Australia's Melting Pot </HL>
<AUTHOR> William McGurn </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> FREST </CO>
<DATELINE> BRISBANE  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Although he's not likely to be confused with actor Paul Hogan, Nguyen Van Sanh says he enjoys laying a few shrimps down on the barbie now and again. 
Like most Australians, too, he loves the sunshine, and at snack time his kids opt for meat pies over spring rolls. 
Unlike most Australians, however, Mr. Nguyen doesn't exactly have your typical Aussie name -- though the local phone directory lists an additional 258 entries here. 

   That's what has some folk down under perturbed. 
For the ethnic changes that have filtered down to redneck Queensland are even more pronounced elsewhere. 
Barely a generation since White Australia was official policy, the island of 16 million people has proved itself an antipodal melting pot, having already profited from the dynamic economic kick of nearly three million Europeans who came here after World War II and today opening its doors even wider, to the point where one out of every three new entrants is from Asia. 
Yet opposition leader John Howard has now called it all into question with his suggestion that the interests of "social cohesion" would best be served by a reduction in Asian immigration. 

   The political fallout from the rumpus may prove decisive, in that thus far it appears only to have called into question Mr. Howard's leadership and threatened to throw a number of traditionally Liberal votes to Labor. 
But the affair illuminates the ambivalence at the heart of Australia's national identity in this its bicentennial year. 
Between a political right harking back to a cozy Australia that never really existed and a left caught up in guilt over past treatment of the Aborigines, many of the loudest voices in the debate do not understand that what makes Australia Western is not its Anglo-Celtic population base but its democratic polity, liberal economy and respect for the rule of law. 
Amid this confusion those with the clearest perspective on the primacy of these values are the immigrants themselves. 

   "I don't think that discrimination is too important here," says Mr. Nguyen, sitting in the back room of the Top Store milk bar he runs with his wife. 
"It's only when the leaders like Mr. Howard talk that problems happen. 
If not, Australians are very good people, very generous." 
He should know: Eight years ago he and his wife were refugees on a boat out of Vietnam. 

   For most of its history Australia had kept its welcome mat rolled up. 
But the threat of a Japanese invasion during World War II convinced Australia it needed to boost its population, and in the postwar era immigrants came in droves, mostly from Southern and Eastern Europe. 
Although they are still coming in droves -- this year's intake will be 140,000 -- about 40% of them are now from the Middle or Far East. 
This shift in immigration patterns has been accompanied by a shift in government policy from rigid assimilationism to a subsidized "multiculturalism," notwithstanding that the last wave of immigrants managed to make their way into Australian society without any government help. 

   "Over here you have this idea that there has to be a policy," says La Trobe University's Michael James, editor of a report on immigration just released by the Centre for Independent Studies in Sydney. 
"The problem is that because this policy has never been defined, it means different things to different people." 

   To the extent that the new policy helped open the door, multiculturalism has been a net asset. 
White Australia was always less an act of apartheid vis-a-vis the native blacks than a conscious form of economic protectionism against Australia's Oriental neighbors, and it was one of the first planks adopted by the federal Labor Party in 1900. 
As recently as 1947, a Labor minister for immigration, Arthur Calwell, could quip in parliament that "two Wongs don't make a white." 
The historical associations of White Australia with Labor make it all the more incongruous to see it now revived by the Liberal Mr. Howard. 

   What has so annoyed many of Mr. Howard's fellow Liberals is that instead of attacking immigration he might have called for an end to the state and federal subsidies under multiculturalism that pay for everything from Greek Meals on Wheels to the Malta Gozo Band to a multicultural TV channel that few people watch when it's not showing dirty French films. 
He might have pointed out that multicultural grants tend to go to second-generation Australians trying to rediscover their roots rather than to newly arrived immigrants. 
Or he might have pointed out that any discrimination along racial lines is anti-Western, exactly the sort of thing most immigrants have come to Australia to escape. 
But he didn't. 

   So today in Australia there are some people arguing the right thing for the wrong reasons and others arguing the wrong thing for the right reasons, cutting across all political lines. 
On the right, for example, Prof. Geoffrey Blainey argues that the growing percentage of Asians now coming in somehow threatens Australia's future as a Western democracy. 
On the left, members of a new class of Australians favor multiculturalism because they confuse it with relativism, the kind of people who talk about the arrival of Captain Arthur Phillip in 1788 as though it were some kind of disaster. 
Both factions miss the point that Australia's attraction is precisely as a nation with Western values. 

   This is particularly true of the latest arrivals to Australia, who by and large come from ethnocentric countries where opportunities are limited and real racism against minorities is often enshrined in law. 
True, the demographic changes that Chinese restaurants, Vietnamese milk bars and Malaysian cabbies bring are real, and, at the local level, often discomfiting despite the economic vitality they represent. 
In terms of values, however, what these same people tend to bring is a willingness to work hard, a determined anti-communism and a strong sense of family. 
If social cohesion is the concern, these folk are the cement and Australia needs more of it. 

   Now, critics and foes alike point to surveys such as the Morgan-Gallup Poll done in August, where 57% of the public said there were "too many" immigrants from Asia. 
But the more telling point is whether they translate that into discriminatory laws and practices, and on this score Australia is today the least racist place in this part of the world. 
This is proved two ways: First, by the thousands of Chinese, Vietnamese, Indonesians, etc. who prefer to be a minority in Australia than ruled by their own people at home; second, by the tolerance Australians show in practice if not always in polls. 

   At its core, Western civilization is pluralistic, because its truths have to do with a person's principles rather than the color of his skin or the place of his birth. 
Of late, Prime Minister Bob Hawke in his emphasis on the primacy of the rule of law has come closer to speaking to this ideal than Mr. Howard, but this is somewhat undermined by the nonsense floated about a treaty with the Aborigines and the government subsidies doled out according to ethnic criteria. 
At a moment when politics, economics and simple geography are conspiring in the Lucky Country's favor, all it needs is enough confidence in the universal worth of its own fundamental values to continue to hold out shelter to all those who contribute so much to society once under its sturdy Western roof. 

   ---
   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
