ID: 127	RANK: 89	SCORE: 12.009358
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870109-0132 </DOCNO>
<HL> Why George Haritos
Barges in Monthly
To Aborigine Town
---
His Vessel Delivers Supplies
Along Australia Coastline;
Another Party Each Time
---
By Geraldine Brooks
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST </IN>
<DATELINE> NUMBULWAR, Australia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The 20th century has reached out to this remote Aborigine settlement, supplied monthly by an oceangoing barge. 

   But people who live here are generally ambivalent about most of the goods it delivers. 
The night security guard at the township's only store makes his patrol armed with spears and a boomerang. 
Steel-framed houses rise on stilts out of the sand dunes, but many families prefer to camp underneath their homes. 
The kitchens have modern stoves, yet most evenings a meal of fresh-caught turtle is broiled outdoors on a bed of coals. 

   Tucked amid the palm trees of Australia's north coast, Numbulwar feels like the end of the earth. 

   For George Haritos, it is the end of the line. 
On the 10th of every month, cyclones permitting, Mr. Haritos steers a barge up a coastal channel to deliver supplies ranging from drilling rods to dill pickles. 
Numbulwar, population 414 Aborigines and 22 whites, is the last stop on the barge's run to isolated communities that roads and railways have never reached -- Melville Island, Crocodile Island, Elcho Island, Milingimbi and Manigreida. 

   Numbulwar, though on the mainland, is very hard to reach by land. 
From the nearest sizable town, Katherine, it is a 12-hour trip in a four-wheel-drive vehicle over a dirt track that is flooded half the year. 

   Getting there by sea isn't much easier. 
Mr. Haritos must navigate by nautical charts on which large stretches of water are marked "unsurveyed." 
Worse, for a 112-foot-long barge that is easily stranded in low water, is the complete lack of information on tides. 
On one chart, a tidal surveyor has jokingly written: "Use mean high water of Todd River for year 1700." (The Todd is a bone-dry riverbed in central Australia that wasn't discovered by Europeans until 1860.) 

   "Before we had radar we just bounced our way between the mud banks and chewed our fingernails," says the skipper, standing barefoot in shorts at the helm. 

   The 66-year-old Mr. Haritos is well acquainted with the reefs and swamps of this lonely coast. 
Since he was a teen-ager, he has worked its waters as a pearl diver, barramunda fisherman and crocodile hunter. 
For the past 22 years, he has run supplies on the Numbulwar route. 
He used to make the trip in his own ketch until it was blown to pieces in a cyclone in 1974. 
These days he works for Darwin-based Barge Express Operations Pty., as master of a $1.2 million vessel fitted out with the latest in electronic-guidance and communications gear. 

   The arrival of the barge in Numbulwar is like the arrival of the Wells Fargo wagon in the fictional River City, Iowa. 
On the day it is due, Hugh Treloar, the storekeeper, climbs to the top of the water tower to keep watch. 
As the barge bobs into sight over the horizon, he scrambles down, jumps into his pickup truck and heads for the beach. 
"She's here! 
Time to go!" he calls out along the way. 

   By the time the barge pulls in, there is quite a party under way on the beach. 
"It's all gear for the community, so everyone gets in to lend a hand," says Wayne Collinson, the township's plumber, hefting a carton of frozen chickens into Mr. Treloar's truck. 
In fact, there are many more hands than the work requires, so most people just stand around chatting, excited by this brief intrusion from the outside world. 

   Because of the unpredictable tides, Mr. Haritos must stay at the wheel to keep the barge steady, while the townsfolk help his three crewmen unload. 
"In the old days we'd tie up at these places and have a good old drink-up and a good old fight, and when the booze ran out we'd think, well, maybe it's time to go get some more." 

   In those days, he says, the settlements never knew when their supplies would show up. 
"We have a tight schedule now, we're on time all the time. 
We've -- how would you call it? -- progressed." 

   Mr. Haritos says he doesn't miss the socializing. 
"I'm not really interested in towns with a lot of people," he says. 
By his standards, Numbulwar is a seething metropolis. 

   As soon as the cargo is on the beach, Mr. Haritos turns the barge around for the two-day trip back to Darwin to pick up more supplies. 
He will spend just 11 hours at home there before setting out on another run. 
Barge crews work three months without any time off, then take three months' vacation. 
Mr. Haritos uses that time to take his wife out boating on the South Alligator River east of Darwin. 

   He only stays in town if he must. 
His longest stint on land was after the cyclone that smashed his ketch flattened Darwin on Christmas Day 1974, reducing his home to a pile of rubble. 
He was ashore for four months, rebuilding the house from the floorboards up. 

   In the early days of their marriage, Joan Haritos used to go with her husband on crocodile-hunting voyages that would sometimes last more than a month. 
The hunters set out at night in small dorries, scanning the dark waters for the red glint of the reptiles' eyes. 
Some nights, Mr. Haritos killed as many as 25. 
In the 1950s, when unskilled workers earned the equivalent of about $12 a week, Mr. Haritos sometimes made as much as $1,000. 
But the work was dangerous and exhausting. 

   "You'd shoot all night and skin all day," he says. 
"You went until you couldn't stand up." 
Once, he fell overboard on top of a crocodile he had just harpooned. 
Fortunately, the crocodile was more interested in getting away from Mr. Haritos than in eating him. 

   "It was a terrible life, hard," he says. 
It ended when crocodiles became scarce and the government made hunting illegal. 
"When I was a boy, my greatest ambition was to shoot a croc," he says. 
"That's how people thought then. 
I can see the change -- and I agree with it -- toward conservation." 

   Mr. Haritos has a souvenir of his croc-hunting days, and it isn't stuffed and mounted. 
In a fenced pond in his suburban back yard, he keeps a 13-foot-long crocodile named Albert. 
"I got him for a friend who was drunk when he asked for him and sober when I brought him back." 
That was 30 years ago, when Albert was about a quarter of his present size. 

   Mrs. Haritos, who has to feed Albert his fish rations during her husband's long absences, says she has grown used to him. 
"At least he doesn't bark," she says. 
But the Haritoses don't venture into his enclosure. 
"If he goes for you, a Band-Aid won't fix it," Mr. Haritos says. 

   Five years ago, Mr. Haritos tried to retire, but the barge company kept begging him to reconsider. 
"They finally caught me at a weak moment," he says. 
What really brought him back, though, was the pull of the coastal waters and the vast stretches of beach and swamp. 
"I love poking around on a bit of reef out here," he says. 
"You can feel like you're the first person that's ever stepped ashore." 

   Now he isn't sure that he will retire. 
"I feel like it sometimes, when I'm clomping over a sandbar or when I give a wharf a bit of a bump. 
But then there's the freedom, the salt air. 
You've got to admit, it's much better than smog." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
