ID: 203	RANK: 44	SCORE: 9.023663
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870611-0096 </DOCNO>
<HL> Blacks Adrift Under Pretoria Emergency
---
Depression, Grief Reign
As Regime Extends Measures
---
By Roger Thurow
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AFRIC </IN>
<DATELINE> JOHANNESBURG, South Africa  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    There are many ways to
measure South Africa's year-old state of emergency. You can
look at the number of people who have been detained, chart
the level of violence or consider the repressive legislation.
   You can also probe the depth of Katherine Mlangeni's sorrow. 

   For Mrs. Mlangeni, the state of emergency -- which the government extended last night for as much as one year -- has been a private state of grief that began one year ago tomorrow; her son Bikhie, a leader of a black liberation group, was detained by security police hours after the nationwide clampdown started. 
Since then, Mrs. Mlangeni has anxiously waited for word of what Bikhie is being charged with, when he might be released, how he is doing. 

   "The worst part is the uncertainty," she says. 
"I know they are trying to break him." 

   For what must be the millionth time, Mrs. Mlangeni takes a photo of her son from her purse. 
Taken weeks before his detention, it shows him in his graduation gown and holding his diploma from Johannesburg's Witwatersrand University. 

   "He was going to start law school, but now who knows?" she says. 
"Some of them come out of detention and they aren't the same up here." 
She taps her head. 
"One boy from the neighborhood, we hear, is very bad off. 
He used to like poems and music and singing. 
Now his friends say he is very different." 

   The state of emergency has changed many things in South Africa's black community. 
Some 25,000 anti-apartheid activists have been detained, and thousands more are in hiding, leaving the black opposition bereft of direction. 
The presence of security troops in the townships creates a climate of fear and suspicion. 

   The indiscriminate repression and widespread detention of children (civil-rights groups say between 30% and 40% of the detainees are under age 18) have alienated an entire generation of youths. 
The euphoria of two years ago, spurred by the rash belief that the apartheid government was teetering, has been replaced by what one social worker calls a "revolutionary depression." 

   The state of emergency has also touched the white community. 
Most whites have become obsessed with security. 
Some have been outraged by the erosion of democratic freedoms. 
The international economic sanctions have pinched some pocketbooks. 
But life in the cozy suburbs largely goes on as if the state of emergency had never happened. 

   In the cramped and dusty black townships, though, the scars are unmistakable. 
"Overall, it's a pretty grim picture in the townships," says Tom Lodge, a specialist on black politics at Witwatersrand. 
"The organizations have lost their sense of momentum and motivation. 
The state demonstrated it has the firepower, that it can rule by repression." 

   Still, the government hasn't quashed the fiery emotions that led to the state of emergency. 
The resistance movement is learning to operate underground and is trying to forge a strategy. 
New leaders are coming to the fore. 
The factors that precipitated unrest -- massive youth unemployment, state intimidation, despair over the future -- are still ticking away. 

   "For weeks, even months, things have seemed quiet. 
The kids are off the streets and back in school. 
The shops are doing regular business," says Nat Molatsi, who lives in a township south of Johannesburg. 
"But it's an uneasy quiet. 
People are waiting for something to happen." 

   This state of anxiety has become the hallmark of the state of emergency. 
James, a 17-year-old student who was detained for three months, confides to a psychiatrist treating ex-detainees that he is terrified the police will pick him up again. 
"I'm afraid to sleep at home," he says. 

   A mother who hadn't heard from her son for months told social workers she was relieved to find his body in a mortuary. 
"At least I know where he is now," she said. 

   Even veteran anti-apartheid activists are forever fretting that the next crackdown is just around the corner. 

   "The society has become fearful and distrustful," says Adele Thomas, director of the Johannesburg Child Welfare Society, which counsels ex-detainees. 
"People fear the worst." 

   Usually, the worst is detention. 
Under the emergency, the government can detain people indefinitely without charge. 
Rough treatment and solitary confinement are the penalties for not cooperating with police interrogators. 
Normal prison privileges, such as family visits and reading material, can be withheld from detainees. 

   "Detention is like pulling up a tree, cutting off its roots, and then putting it back into the ground," says Paul Verryn, a counselor at the South African Council of Churches. 
"There is a feeling of total hopelessness, a loss of self-respect and responsibility. 
Complete alienation." 

   Three young men on the lam, ex-detainees now drifting from house to house, wander into the Johannesburg office of the Detainees' Parents Support Committee. 
They have come, briefly, to tell their stories of detention and to catch up with each other on what is happening in their township of Duduza, east of Johannesburg. 

   They are "comrades," members of the cadre of young black militants who seized control of township politics in 1984 and pushed the black rebellion further than it had ever gone before. 
Now, following their detentions of varying lengths, they have returned to a world far different from the one they knew. 

   "It seems like everyone has joined a church choir," says 19-year-old Godfrey, reporting on the taming of his once-radical student organization. 
"There's choirs all over the place. 
They figure the police won't touch a choir." 

   "People are frightened," says Zola, 21. 
Archie, also 21, agrees. 
"The state of emergency has been a blow. 
It has hurt." 

   But Archie reckons the state of emergency also has its benefits, in a curious sort of way. 
He believes it will make the black opposition stronger. 

   "Detention can be an education," he says. 
"Before we were detained, we were maybe a little ignorant about what was going on around the country. 
We were just concerned about ourselves, our township. 
Suddenly, there you are with other comrades and you hear what they have to say. 
You come out much more aware." 

   He believes this will make the black opposition stronger. 
For now, though, the three have to go, although they don't know exactly where. 

   "At our age, in just about any other country, we'd be expected to start contributing to society," Archie says. 
"But just look at us. 
We don't even know where we're heading." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
