ID: 203	RANK: 50	SCORE: 8.739739
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880915-0010 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<TEXT>
   HURRICANE GILBERT BATTERED Mexico with heavy winds and rains. 

   The storm, with sustained winds of at least 160 mph, slammed into the Yucatan Peninsula. 
It knocked out communications on the resort island of Cozumel and leveled slum areas in Cancun on the mainland. 
Thousands of people were evacuated from the path of the hurricane, said to be the most powerful ever recorded in the Western Hemisphere. 
In the U.S., residents of low-lying areas in Texas and Louisiana began seeking higher ground. 
Forecasters said the storm could hit the coast as early as tomorrow. 

   Eleven storm-related deaths -- nine in Jamaica and five in the Dominican Republic -- were reported. 
More than 500,000 people have been left homeless. 

   ---
   Security forces in Lesotho attacked hijackers holding a busload of pilgrims going to see Pope John Paul II. Officials said three hijackers and a hostage were killed in the shootout involving South African police requested by Lesotho. 
The shooting erupted shortly after the pope arrived in Maseru after an unscheduled stop in Johannesburg. 

   ---
   Dukakis pledged to proceed with some strategic systems, including the Stealth bomber. 
In a speech at Georgetown University, the Democratic presidential nominee said he would place greater emphasis than the Reagan administration on improving conventional military capabilities for central Europe. 

   ---
   A Stanford University team transplanted the human immune system into experimental mice. 
The experiment should allow mice to be used for the first time as experimental animals for studying AIDS in humans and for testing human vaccines and drugs. 

   ---
   FBI Director Sessions suspended three bureau employees and censured three others for operating what he called an "unnecessarily broad" terrorism inquiry into a group opposed to Reagan's policies in Central America. 
The suspensions were for 14 days without pay. 
The probe was conducted under then-chief Webster, currently CIA head. 

   ---
   A Senate panel cleared legislation imposing tough sanctions against South Africa. 
The 10-9 vote in the Foreign Relations Committee was along party lines. 
The bill may be doomed because it lacks broad bipartisan support. 
Reagan has threatened to veto sanctions legislation. 

   South Africa's government said that three prominent anti-apartheid activists who took refuge Tuesday in the U.S. consulate in Johannesburg won't be arrested if they leave. 
The three men, who escaped from a hospital, had been detained without charge by Pretoria for more than a year. 

   ---
   India announced a five-day cease-fire in Sri Lanka to allow Tamil rebels fighting for an independent homeland to surrender their arms and participate in local elections. 
New Delhi's government has stationed about 47,000 peacekeeping troops in the island nation, site of a five-year-old ethnic war. 

   ---
   PLO leader Arafat said he was willing to meet with Israeli government representatives at the U.N. and, speaking in Hebrew, wished Israel a happy Jewish new year. 
Israeli officials dismissed the greeting as a stunt that shouldn't be taken seriously. 

   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir met in Budapest with Hungarian leader Grosz. 
The talks between the two leaders were expected to center on the Mideast and moves to restore diplomatic relations between the two nations, which were severed in 1967. 

   ---
   The Soviet Union conducted its first nuclear test explosion to be monitored by U.S. experts. 
The blast at a long-secret testing ground in Soviet Kazakhstan was designed to have a force of 100 to 150 kilotons. 
The verification was part of steps to ratify two treaties limiting the size of nuclear tests. 

   ---
   Lebanon's army closed the only crossing between Beirut's Christian and Moslem sectors after Shiite militiamen took up positions in the capital for the first time in 17 months. 
The actions came a day after Lebanon's Shiite Moslem defense minister was briefly held hostage by Christian forces. 

   ---
   Students in South Korea hurled firebombs at runners carrying the Olympic torch, and police said at least 16 troopers fighting to disperse the protesters were injured. 
None of the runners was hurt in the incident near Kyungwon University outside Seoul. 

   ---
   Lech Walesa traveled to Warsaw from his home in Gdansk to prepare for a meeting today with Polish authorities. 
The talks between Poland's interior minister and the Solidarity founder are expected to focus on the banned trade union's future. 

   ---
   Burmese opposition leaders said they were prepared to form an interim government as more than 100,000 protesters demanded that Rangoon's one-party government resign. 
All shops and offices were closed in the capital as a nationwide strike began causing shortages of food and fuel. 

   ---
   The U.S. has concluded that Libya is capable of producing chemical weapons and is about to begin "full-scale" manufacturing of poison gas, the State Department said. 
A spokesman declined to specify what types of weapons Tripoli could make, or to provide evidence of its capability. 

   ---
   Died: Rexford A. Bristol, 85, former chairman and president of Foxboro Co., Tuesday, in Norwood, Mass. . . . 
Bradford Smith Jr., 86, ex-chairman of INA Corp., Tuesday, in Centreville, Md. . . . 
Lauris Norstad, 81, former chairman of Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. and ex-commander of NATO, Monday, in Tucson, Ariz. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
