ID: 203	RANK: 96	SCORE: 7.492875
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880225-0023 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   REAGAN BLAMED outside agitators for inciting unrest in Israeli-occupied areas. 

   In his first news conference in four months, the president said, "There is every evidence these riots are not just spontaneous and home-grown." 
He wouldn't identify the agitators. 
The assertion is likely to complicate Shultz's Mideast trip, which begins today. 
In the region, West Bank villagers lynched a fellow Palestinian suspected of collaborating with Israel. 
The incident was part of stepped-up protests in response to the secretary of state's mission to Israel and several Arab nations. 

   Reagan defended Meese, who is under scrutiny for his role in a Mideast pipeline plan. 
Reagan said he couldn't recall being told about the project. 

   ---
   PRETORIA BANNED all political activities by 17 major anti-apartheid groups. 

   In the harshest step taken by the South African government in its 20-month-old state of emergency, it will all but close the United Democratic Front, the nation's largest anti-apartheid coalition, as well as various community, youth and student groups. 
Pretoria also curbed the activities of several individual leaders. 
The regulations will force the country's largest black labor federation to confine itself to labor issues and refrain from politics. 

   The move set the stage for what activists warned would be greater confrontation, including the renewal of widespread unrest in the black townships. 

   ---
   AN AIDS REPORT URGED increased government spending to fight the disease. 

   The chairman of Reagan's AIDS commission called for a $2 billion rise in annual public spending and the hiring of thousands more workers to combat the epidemic. 
Meanwhile, the anti-AIDS drug AZT showed encouraging results in a small preliminary test in Holland, and SmithKline Beckman said it devised an AIDS test that nearly eliminates the problem of false positive readings. 

   As many as 460 Americans may get AIDS infections each year from transfusions of tainted blood that slip through blood-bank screening, the U.S. said. 

   ---
   The Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment protects satire and parody, even when they cause emotional distress to public figures. 
Voting 8-0, the justices threw out a $200,000 verdict a jury had awarded the Rev. Jerry Falwell for emotional distress caused by a 1983 parody in Hustler magazine. 

   ---
   Roh was inaugurated as South Korea's president, and pledged to end decades of authoritarian rule and form a "people's government." 
But Roh, who succeeds Chun, warned against disorder. 
Thousands of students in at least eight cities had staged protests against the new administration. 

   ---
   The Kremlin installed an Armenian as the Communist Party chief of a disputed territory in a bid to end ethnic protests in Soviet Armenia. 
In Estonia, anti-Soviet protesters demonstrated in the city of Tallinn to mark the Baltic nation's brief independence from Moscow that ended in 1940. 

   ---
   Shevardnadze told Shultz that Moscow was willing to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan by year end. 
Such a move would be two months shorter than a Soviet pullout outlined two weeks ago, which set a 10-month withdrawal starting May 15. 
In Pakistan, a U.S. envoy briefed officials and Afghan rebels on Moscow's stance. 

   ---
   House Democrats predicted that their $30 million package of nonmilitary aid to Nicaragua's rebels would be approved next week. 
GOP leaders, however, scrambled to assemble a rival plan that they said would give stronger support to the Contras. 

   ---
   Police in Northern Ireland charged a British soldier with killing an unarmed Roman Catholic civilian, as Irish and British leaders met to discuss strained Anglo-Irish relations. 
Meanwhile, a suspected terrorist bomb exploded in Belfast, killing a soldier and injuring three others, police said. 

   ---
   Mulroney's government introduced conflict-of-interest legislation designed to rebuild public confidence in his scandal-plagued administration. 
The rules apply to members of Canada's Parliament, as well as to ministers, opposition leaders and parliamentary aides. 

   ---
   Portugal's prime minister said his nation wants to review a 1983 defense pact, but isn't seeking a cut in U.S. military forces in the country. 
Cavaco Silva, who met at the White House with Reagan, urged increased aid. 
But Reagan said all nations hosting American military bases must "share the pain" from U.S. budget cuts. 

   ---
   CIA Director Webster said Reagan is opposed to proposals aimed at preventing another Iran-Contra affair, including a required 48-hour notice to Congress of any covert action. 
Webster testified before a House Intelligence panel and said the president would reject any legislation limiting his authority over secret operations. 

   ---
   Panama's president has indicated to associates that he may be ready to sever his close links to Noriega. 
U.S. officials said any such move by President Delvalle would narrow the military chief's base of support and possibly hasten Noriega's political demise, which the U.S. has been seeking. 

   ---
   Presidential candidates escalated campaigning in the South following Tuesday's contests in South Dakota and Minnesota. 
The GOP's Dole finished first in both states. 
Among Democrats, Gephardt won South Dakota's primary, while Dukakis was first in Minnesota's caucuses. 
Meanwhile, Simon will bypass Super Tuesday campaigning. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
