ID: 106	RANK: 42	SCORE: 5.487281
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861212-0086 </DOCNO>
<HL> Rutans Find It Hard Getting Voyager
Aloft for First Nonstop Global Flight
---
By Eileen White
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/12/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT TDY ALD HPC HXL
AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN>
<DATELINE> MOJAVE, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Burt and Richard Rutan have found that the world's first nonstop, around-the-world airplane trip isn't easy to get off the ground. 

   In 1981, 43-year-old airplane designer Burt Rutan and his brother the test-pilot Richard, 48, announced their intention to build a plane that would fly more than 25,000 miles around the globe without refueling -- doubling the world nonstop flight record of 12,532 miles, set in 1962. 

   Five years and 22,000 man-hours later, the Voyager appears to be poised finally to take off on its daring flight sometime this weekend. 
Although further delays are possible because of uncertain weather, the flight must be launched soon, or be postponed until spring when the winter's cold desert winds have gone away. 

   After the plane set a world record for non-destination, nonstop flights last July, staying aloft for 4 1/2 days, the Rutan brothers had hoped to make the world flight in late summer. 
But technical problems, including a major propeller failure, forced several delays. 

   On the trek from idea to runway, the Rutans had to win over a skeptical public and aerospace community, who at first failed to support the project, which is said to be as risky as the pioneering flights of Charles Lindbergh and Amelia Earhart. 

   The challenge is immense. 
To follow the equator without refueling, a plane must be large enough to carry thousands of pounds of fuel, yet light enough to minimize the size and weight of its engines. 

   The 1962 nonstop flight record was set by a giant B-52 Air Force bomber, which has a 46,000-gallon fuel capacity but is too heavy to make a global flight without refueling. 
By contrast, a four-passenger, single-engine Beech Bonanza propeller-driven plane weighs only 3,412 pounds. 
But the Bonanza carries only 74 gallons of fuel, which means it would have to refuel a minimum of 25 times to circumnavigate the globe. 

   Burt Rutan, designer of the new Beech Starship business aircraft, conceived Voyager to weigh less than 2,000 pounds, yet carry nearly 9,000 pounds -- or more than 1,500 gallons -- of fuel and two crew members. 

   The plane is essentially a flying fuel tank, with fuel stored in 17 separate tanks. 
The airframe is made of ultra-lightweight composites of graphite and wood fiber, in a radical design that features small forward wings for maximum lift and flexible rear wings almost as long as the wings of a 110-passenger Boeing 727 jetliner. 

   Because the project didn't attract much corporate support, it limped along for years as the Rutans' personal funds ran out. 
"We looked around for one big sponsor who would put their name across the plane," says co-pilot Jeana Yeager. 
"But nobody wanted to take a chance on a 'paper' airplane." 

   Voyager finally began to take shape last year. 
The equipment, including many of the materials in the hand-built plane, was mostly obtained on loan or without charge from a handful of companies intrigued by the commercial spinoffs. 

   Teledyne Inc. adapted a long-range, high-endurance engine it makes for military reconnaissance planes. 
King Radio Corp., a unit of Allied-Signal Inc., developed the avionics. 
And Hercules Inc. and Hexcel Corp., makers of composite materials, helped build the molded structure, which they hope will demonstrate the use of lightweight composites to replace metal in aircraft frames. 

   "I heard they had this project going and told them we had a low-fuel consumption engine they should take a look at," says Donald Bigler, president of Teledyne Continental Motors Inc., Mobile, Ala. 
The company hopes to market the engine under the name Voyager for the next generation of business aircraft, he says. 

   Other companies lent computers and communications equipment or gave donations, such as the $3,000 that went to lease Voyager's "mission control" a trailer at Mojave's tiny airport. 
The companies received advertising rights for their support. 
In addition, about 3,700 individuals made donations of $100 each to the project. 

   After the Voyager's test flights this summer were plagued by technical problems, about two dozen aerospace scientists and engineers paid their own expenses to travel to this remote location about 200 miles northeast of Los Angeles to help. 

   Younger workers, lured by the chance to help make aviation history, have also pitched in. 
Several test pilots assigned to nearby Edwards Air Force Base, where the Voyager will take off and land, are helping to process flight data on their time off. 
Says meteorologist Larry Brunch, who analyzes weather data for Voyager between shifts at the local National Weather Service office, "They need help." 

   The volunteers formed a network among old colleagues, persuading the Air Force to allow an employee of its weather-monitoring station in Omaha, Neb., to help Voyager find a safe path around turbulence. 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration allowed the Voyager crew to use a NASA channel for air-to-ground communications. 
Voyager carries an experimental emergency-locater beacon, on loan from NASA, that would be triggered if the plane went down in salt water. 

   Finally, with cold winds already whipping through Mojave, Voyager's volunteer crew is racing to get the plane in the air before the weather turns too ugly. 
Says Ms. Yeager: "We've spent all our money on this. 
We have to finish it." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
