ID: 106	RANK: 45	SCORE: 5.428428
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880628-0044 </DOCNO>
<HL> French Officials Discount Malfunction In Airbus Crash, Say Pilot Flew Too Low </HL>
<AUTHOR> Susan Carey (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> EUROP CANDA NWA PN GE BAB </CO>
<IN> AIR ARO </IN>
<TEXT>
   French Transport Minister Louis Mermaz discounted a systems failure as the cause of Sunday's crash at an air show of an Air France A-320 jetliner, while his deputy said that the plane was flying too low. 

   Officials said the investigation was continuing. 
If the culprit is human error as early signs seem to indicate, airline enthusiasm for the technologically advanced 150-seat twin jet probably will continue unabated. 
If the craft's computer-controlled cockpit is found at fault, sales could be jeopardized. 

   No A-320 orders have been canceled because of the accident, said an Airbus spokesman in Toulouse, France. 
"Airlines are realistic," he said. 
"They know there's been an accident and they know there's an investigation under way." 
Another spokesman said later that the transport ministry officials' remarks vindicated the A-320's systems. 

   Mr. Mermaz told a news conference in Paris that initial investigation showed no evidence that the Airbus Industrie model is unsafe in normal operations. 
"No evidence at present throws doubt on the proper functioning of the plane," he said. 

   Meanwhile, Daniel Tennenbaum, director-general of the French civil aviation authority, said the plane was flying at only 30 meters (about 100 feet) when it made a pass over Habsheim airfield in eastern France. 
Mr. Tennenbaum said the new model's fully computerized cockpit requires eight seconds to react to a pilot's command. 
Because the plane was so low, the pilot had only five seconds before the craft slammed into the forest near the airfield and burst into flames. 

   But a U.S. spokesman for Airbus asserted that the accident "has nothing to do with the electronic systems in this airplane. 
There's a lag time between when you tell a plane's engines to do something and when the plane can respond. 
It's not peculiar to this airplane, it's a natural function of a turbojet engine's response to the demand for more power." 

   France's main pilots union said the plane appeared to not respond to commands, a problem which could be due to human error or a systems failure. 
The electronic thrust controls, which the pilot was attempting to operate to gain altitude, need eight seconds to reach full effect, giving little margin for error at low altitude, industry sources said. 

   Three people were killed and at least 50 injured when the chartered plane failed to pull up out of a low swoop over the airfield. 
The plane was carrying 136 journalists, dignitaries and other passengers, some of whom had never flown before. 
It had taken off from a large commercial airport at Mulhouse, on the French-Swiss border, and was scheduled to fly low over the air show, circle Mount Blanc, and return to Mulhouse, according to the Airbus spokesman. 
The presence of passengers on a demonstration flight is sure to raise concerns here about air-show flying regulations. 

   Air France has had two electrical problems on A-320s, the first on the inaugural flight in March and the second last week on a flight that was scheduled to fly to Amsterdam from Paris, but was canceled. 

   The A-320, which attracted a record number of orders prior to making its first flight 16 months ago, now has received 319 firm orders and 203 options and commitments from 21 airlines and leasing companies. 
Carriers that have ordered the model include Northwest Airlines, Pan American World Airways, Iberia Air Lines, Lufthansa German Airlines, All Nippon Airways, Indian Airlines and South African Airways. 
The biggest aircraft-leasing companies also have ordered the craft. 

   Because of this strong demand and a relatively low production rate, the earliest delivery date currently available for the $35 million jetliner is sometime in 1992 or 1993, the spokesman said. 

   The new model's three present operators, Air France, British Airways and the French domestic carrier Air Inter, all are scheduled to take delivery of additional A320s this year. 
Ansett Airlines of Australia is the next customer, and will begin taking its eight A-320s on order later this year. 
Ansett stressed yesterday that Sunday's crash wouldn't change its plans. 

   British Airways said it would put its two A-320s back into service today after a 36-hour suspension following the accident. 

   In Montreal, a spokesman for Air Canada said the airline will "be following the results of that investigation closely" because it is considering the purchase of 34 Airbus A-320 aircraft to replace its fleet of 33 Boeing 727s. 

   Air Canada's president and chief executive hinted strongly last month that the company had selected Airbus for the order, valued at about $1.2 billion, but a formal announcement hasn't been made. 
The spokesman insisted the airline is still considering the McDonnell Douglas Corp. MD-80 and the Boeing 737-400 as well. 

   In Seattle, a Boeing Co. spokesman declined to speculate about the cause of the Airbus A-320 crash or its effect on aircraft orders. 
The spokesman said aircraft typically fly "pretty low" during air show demonstrations. 
"The altitude depends on the skill of the crew, type of plane, its weight and weather conditions. 
How far is too low?" 
St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas declined to comment. 

   A spokesman for Northwest Airlines, which has 100 A-320s on order, said the carrier is in touch with Airbus and is monitoring the situation. 
"We've seen nor heard absolutely nothing that impugns the integrity of that airplane," he added. 

   Northwest, a unit of St. Paul, Minn.-based NWA Inc., is to receive the first of its A-320s in June 1989, with subsequent deliveries into the early 1990s. 

   A spokesman for Pan American World Airways said it was "premature" to comment on the crash. 
The airline, a unit of New York-based Pan Am Corp., has 16 A-320s on order. 
The first is scheduled for delivery in the 1989, the rest in 1990. 

   All of the planes now in service are powered by CFM56-5 engines built by a joint venture of General Electric Co. and Snecma of France. 

   Investigators yesterday examined two flight recorders for clues as to why the plane, which was delivered to Air France only last week, crashed. 

   According to a rescuer, the stunned pilot said: "I wanted to boost the power, but {the plane} didn't respond." 
The pilot and the co-pilot, both uninjured, are among Air France's most experienced and train flight crews on the A-320. 

   Unlike most jetliners, which use conventional hydraulic systems, the A-320 has a revolutionary design that uses computerized controls to convey the pilot's commands. 
Its computers can also override a pilot if he inadvertently orders the plane to do something dangerous. 

   Among the other questions raised yesterday was why the A-320 made the low fly-by with passengers on board. 
Neither Airbus -- a consortium made up of government-supported aerospace concerns in France, West Germany, England and Spain -- nor the other major plane builders allow passengers to ride along in flights that demonstrate more than normal performance of an aircraft. 

   But Air France, which leased the plane to the Mulhouse Aero-Club for the show Sunday, said that all of the necessary permissions had been received. 

   ---
   Eileen White Read in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
