ID: 106	RANK: 92	SCORE: 4.996627
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870505-0007 </DOCNO>
<HL> TRW Recasts to Focus on Electronics, Data Services
---
Even Its Automotive Products Have
A High-Technology Orientation
---
By Ralph E. Winter
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TRW
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
AEROSPACE (ARO)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<DATELINE> CLEVELAND  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   TRW Inc. never liked being tagged a conglomerate. 
Soon it won't be one. 

   The company, which began here in 1901 with $2,500 of capital to make screws and bolts, now has $6 billion a year in sales. 
It is being reshaped into an electronics and information services concern that also has a large auto and truck parts business. 
But even its automotive operations have taken on an electronic orientation, offering, for example, new electronically controlled power steering systems. 

   The transformation of TRW is the work of Ruben F. Mettler, its chairman and chief executive officer for the past decade. 
The 63-year-old Mr. Mettler, who has a doctorate in electrical and aeronautical engineering, is emphasizing electronics and space satellite operations because he believes they have far greater growth potential than the industrial and energy businesses -- fasteners, tools, bearings, airplane engine parts and other related products -- that he has been shedding in the past two years. 

   Analysts agree that strong growth opportunities are there. 
But they note that the electronics arena is crowded and that rapid technological advances also can cause havoc for major players in that competitive industry. 

   Still, TRW warily has avoided head-on competition in computers with International Business Machines Corp. and in communications with American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. TRW doesn't make general-purpose computers and it is emphasizing some of the newer electronic service activities, rather than general communications products. 
And it has a leg up on many smaller competitors, because the bulk of TRW's whopping $1.63 billion in research and development spending last year is going toward work in electronics and space. 
The federal government and other TRW customers provided $1.35 billion of those R&amp;D funds last year. 

   What sparked TRW's new expansion in electronics? 
TRW officials say it reflects the fundamental change in the way people obtain information. 
Computerized databases now are an integral part of the nation's information system, partly because of the widespread use of small computers and other electronic systems. 

   And TRW has gained expertise in electronic data handling. 
Last year nearly $1.5 billion, or 25%, of its sales came from computerized information systems and services -- ranging from interpreting data gleaned by spy satellites to tracking the bill-paying habits of 133 million U.S. consumers. 

   Reflecting a major restructuring the past two years, TRW now gets about 55% of its operating profit and sales from space satellites, electronic equipment and a rapidly growing portfolio of commercial electronic services. 
By the early 1990s, those businesses will account for two-thirds of earnings and sales, Mr. Mettler estimates. 

   In contrast, when he took charge, electronics and space contributed only 21% of TRW's operating profit. 
Auto and truck parts still account for about 40% of operating profit and sales. 
Industrial and energy products now represent only 5% of corporate sales. 

   Despite its growing expertise in some of the most exciting new technologies -- lasers, microelectronics, space satellites, superconducting materials, and ceramics that may someday replace metals -- TRW hasn't won stock market recognition as a high-technology company. 
In fact, its stock is selling at about 12 times expected 1987 earnings, below the approximately 15 times earnings for Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index and about half the 24 times earnings for a growth index of 100 technology stocks maintained by Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc., San Francisco. 

   Trading recently at about $100 a share, TRW has a stock market value of about $3 billion. 
"The pieces are worth more than the whole," contends Sidney J. Heller, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. 
"It's surprising that somebody hasn't made a run at them." 

   Mr. Mettler says, "The market appears to be taking a wait-and-see attitude." 
He insists the company's restructuring is working "very well indeed" and says TRW expects to show accelerated earnings growth that eventually will impress investors. 
"We're managing the company for the long term," he says. 

   While praising the restructuring, in which TRW shed businesses with annual sales of about $800 million, some aerospace analysts such as Morton Langer and Steven Binder of Bear, Stearns &amp; Co. believe TRW should shed additional units including, eventually, the automotive business. 
Mr. Mettler disagrees and says that, while there will be continual change in TRW's business mix, major regrouping is over. 

   Despite a 19% drop in first-quarter profit, Mr. Mettler forecasts a "double-digit rise" in 1987 share net. 
The first-quarter earnings decline, which Mr. Mettler had forecast, principally reflected high new-product costs and the absence of one-time gains that had helped year-earlier results. 
For 1986, the company earned $217.7 million, or $7.11 a share on a fully diluted basis, and many analysts predict profit of $8 a share or higher for 1987. 

   Some analysts, however, are leery of such projections, citing repeated instances in recent years where one problem or another kept TRW's earnings from meeting expectations. 
"The estimate of $8 a share was first made about five years ago," Shearson's Mr. Heller notes. 

   TRW hopes to improve its earnings consistency by expanding commercial electronic information systems and services, already a $500 million-a-year operation, by about 20% a year. 
It started the business more than a decade ago with a computerized credit information system to help businesses decide which companies and consumers are good credit risks. 
Subsequently, TRW added real estate information and other business data services. 

   This year, the company is venturing into consumer products with a credit service it calls "credentials." 
The consumer fills out a master credit application that is stored on a TRW computer system and can be made available, at the consumer's request, to banks or businesses. 
This helps simplify the process of getting a car loan, a credit card or a charge account. 
The consumer also gets regular reports on his credit worthiness. 

   TRW also is selling expertise to other businesses making the transition to the electronics age. 
Last November, it bought Teknekron Financial Systems Inc., which provides information processing systems and consulting services to businesses. 
Mr. Mettler contends thousands of businesses, from retailers to hospitals, struggle with millions of transactions each year and need help. 

   Mr. Mettler late last year established a special unit to speed commercial application of information-handling advances TRW is developing under government contracts. 
He says it isn't safe to assume, as many companies do, that such a transfer will occur merely by having engineers and executives rub shoulders at company meetings. 

   TRW also is expanding its servicing and repairing of electronic equipment made by other manufacturers. 
Last year, its technicians made nearly two million service calls at 250,000 customer offices to service 1,500 different equipment models. 

   Microelectronics, an area in which TRW has invested $600 million, offers another huge growth opportunity, company executives say. 
Several electronics specialists agree, maintaining that microelectronics eventually will permit the development of a new generation of electronic equipment. 
TRW specialists hope to develop within 18 months a supercomputer chip that contains 25 million to 35 million electronic devices on a two-inch square of silicon. 
Today's most densely packed chips contain about one million devices. 

   TRW also expects to expand its military and space business. 
Its expertise in satellites, lasers and data handling, for example, already has won it more than $100 million of contracts for President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative or "Star Wars" program. 

   The company recently has faced charges that it mishandled military contracts, but industry analysts believe these troubles won't cost TRW any government business. 
TRW officials have admitted that subordinates overcharged the Pentagon for airplane engine parts, and they say accounting irregularities on some electronics contracts may have caused overbilling. 

   Mr. Mettler contends that the company has maintained its credibility with the Defense Department, as TRW reported the problem itself and took corrective action -- including the firings of the president of a subsidiary and a vice president of the parent company. 

   In the automotive area, Joseph T. Gorman, TRW president and chief operating officer, forecasts a 25% compound annual growth rate in industry sales of passenger restraint systems, of which TRW is a leading supplier. 
By the mid-1990s, he expects restraint systems -- which will include electronic controls and sensors and air bags -- will average nearly $300 a car, up from the current $50. 

   He sees another growth area in electronically controlled, "intelligent" power steering systems that use electric motors to direct the wheels, instead of hydraulic pumps. 

   TRW even sees growth opportunities in one of its familiar mainstays: auto engine valves. 
Soon after starting the company, TRW's founders adapted the technology for making screws and bolts to make engine valves for the fledgling auto industry. 
Today, company officials continue to look to strong engine-valve growth because, they say, more manufacturers are using four valves per engine cylinder instead of the conventional two. 

   ---

                  The Transformation of TRW
                                   1977 Sales    1986 Sales
 Industrial and energy                29%            5%
 Automotive Parts                     29%           39%
 Electronics and Space                32%           56%
 Total sales,
   in billions of dollars           $3.26         $6.04

</TEXT>
</DOC>
