ID: 166	RANK: 18	SCORE: 6.565704
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870209-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Herald Apparently Is Won by Murdoch;
Other Firms Scramble for TV Networks
---
By Tony Patrick
Special to The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST NWS
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
PUBLISHING (PUB)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<DATELINE> SYDNEY, Australia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. apparently won the battle for Herald &amp; Weekly Times Ltd., Australia's largest media group. 
But the reshaping of Australia's media industry will continue, as the scramble to set up television networks intensifies with the sale of Herald's stations and the impending sale of those owned by News Corp. 

   News Corp., Herald and John Fairfax Ltd. reached an agreement Friday under which Fairfax purchased Herald's Melbourne television station for the equivalent of $214.3 million. 
Fairfax also acquired most of Herald's smaller newspapers in the state of New South Wales, as well as News Corp.'s Tamworth, New South Wales, paper, for a total of $30.1 million. 
In return, Fairfax withdrew its bid for Herald and dropped all legal action against News Corp.'s competing Herald offer. 

   The agreement paves the way for News Corp. to take control of Herald. 
Mr. Murdoch's company has acquired nearly 70% of Herald's shares, and the end of legal actions means he can step in to control the Herald board. 

   Fairfax also will ask the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal to stop an investigation into News Corp.'s takeover of Herald. 
The tribunal still might continue its investigation, which is based on Mr. Murdoch's U.S. citizenship and Australian regulations prohibiting control of television stations here by foreigners. 
But analysts believe such a move isn't likely now that Herald has sold its television operations and Mr. Murdoch has said News Corp. will sell its two television stations as well. 

   News Corp. emerged from the transactions as the biggest newspaper publisher in Australia, with about 50% of the total newspaper circulation in the major cities. 
In addition to its own publications, which already cover most of Australia, Mr. Murdoch's company will retain Herald newspapers in Melbourne, Brisbane, Hobart, and Adelaide, as well as a string of Herald suburban newspapers, several magazines and printing and distribution operations. 

   Analysts said the price paid by News Corp., while difficult to determine exactly, makes the complicated transactions a bargain for the Murdoch-controlled company. 
After selling the television operations of News Corp. and Herald, Mr. Murdoch might end up paying about $536 million to $670 million to greatly expand his newspaper-publishing empire. 

   The active bidding for the Herald broadcasting operations pushed their prices well above earlier offers for the stations. 
That effectively reduces the cost to News Corp. of acquiring Herald, because it gives Herald additional cash that will go to News Corp. when it takes control of Herald. 

   Fairfax, meanwhile, is in position to lead Australia's second television network with its acquisition of the Melbourne station. 
It already owns television stations in Sydney and Brisbane. 
Last month, Bond Corp. became the first company to set up a television network covering most major Australian cities, when it acquired the television operations of privately owned Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd. 

   Robert Holmes a Court, a businessman with television stations in Perth and Adelaide, might join with Fairfax to establish a national network, analysts speculate. 
Mr. Holmes a Court, under a previous agreement, is to get the Herald newspaper business in his home state of Western Australia, but failed in his bid for Herald's Melbourne television station. 

   But the carving-up of Herald also strengthened a competitor of Fairfax in the race to establish television networks. 
Herald will sell its other television station, in Adelaide, plus radio stations in the states of Victoria and South Australia, to businessman Kerry Stokes for $87.1 million. 

   Mr. Stokes owns a television station in Canberra and a license for a station in Perth. 
He also is expected to be a bidder for News Corp.'s two television stations, which could make him the leader in a third national network. 

   The buyer of the News Corp. stations is likely to be announced today. 
If another company wins the race for News Corp.'s television stations, that bidder is expected to team with Mr. Stokes to form the third network. 
The two News Corp. stations are expected to be sold for a total of about $502.4 million. 

   The carving up of Herald was sparked in part by a government proposal to liberalize laws that currently limit a company to owning only two television stations. 
That liberalization, if approved by parliament, would encourage creation of national networks, which would boost profitability for station owners. 

   The government also proposes to reduce the ability of one company to own both a television station and a major newspaper in any city. 
Such a change could present problems for Fairfax, which now will own a television station and a newspaper in Melbourne. 

   Some further redistribution of Australia's media business therefore is likely as the television networks are established and rulings are made on newspaper-television cross ownership. 
Owners of the few independent television stations that remain might sell those businesses if they bid for the News Corp. stations but fail in those offers. 
And Mr. Holmes a Court, who comes out of the Herald carve-up with few of the spoils, still might fight to improve his position, analysts say. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
