ID: 166	RANK: 77	SCORE: 5.614206
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870901-0141 </DOCNO>
<HL> Buy-Out, Restructuring of John Fairfax
Proposed by Member of Founding Family
---
By Tony Patrick
Special to The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<DATELINE> SYDNEY, Australia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A member of the family that founded John Fairfax Ltd., one of Australia's two major publishers of newspapers and magazines, proposed a buy-out and restructuring of the concern that values it at 2.25 billion Australian dollars ($1.6 billion). 

   The family member, Warwick Fairfax, said he made the bid to acquire all the shares in John Fairfax Ltd. because "privatization will provide stability" at a time when potentially hostile bidders have been buying shares in the company. 

   Although the Fairfax family owns more than 50% of John Fairfax Ltd., there has been increasingly intense speculation in recent weeks that an outside investor might try to acquire the company. 
The Australian financier Robert Holmes a Court and the Australian transportation company TNT Ltd. each has built up a stake of more than 3% in John Fairfax Ltd. 

   Yesterday's bid is structured so that any Fairfax family members wanting to reduce their interests in the company can sell all or part of their stakes without making John Fairfax Ltd. vulnerable to an outside bid. 

   Under the restructuring plan, John Fairfax Ltd.'s David Syme unit would acquire the Fairfax magazine division, the Australian Financial Review newspaper and the Business Review weekly business-magazines division. 

   The David Syme unit already owns the Melbourne Age and some smaller newspapers. 
After the restructuring, David Syme would be listed on the Australian stock exchange. 

   Besides ending takeover speculation, Mr. Fairfax said his proposed buy-out and restructuring would allow John Fairfax Ltd. shareholders to "continue to participate in present significant and profitable assets of the group and to benefit from future media expansion through a new listed company." 

   Mr. Fairfax offered to buy John Fairfax Ltd. shares through his private company, Tryart Pty. 
Ltd., for 7.50 dollars ($5.33) a share. 
He also is offering alternatives of three shares in David Syme plus 4.50 dollars cash for each Fairfax share, or 15 David Syme shares for every two Fairfax shares. 

   John Fairfax Ltd. shares rose two dollars, to nine dollars, on the Sydney stock exchange yesterday, indicating that speculators expect the buy-out offer to be raised or believe the share-swap alternative is particularly attractive. 
Turnover was unusually high, at 1.4 million shares. 

   Directors of John Fairfax Ltd. advised shareholders to retain their shares until the full board has studied the offer. 

   Rupert Murdoch, chief executive of News Corp. -- the other major Australian publisher -- said that Mr. Fairfax's buy-out offer might have to be raised. 

   In answer to a question after addressing the Securities Institute of Australia, Mr. Murdoch said: "I don't know if he'll be successful at this price. 
Certainly, if you look at the retail value of all those assets in today's media market, I imagine it's a lot more than 7.50" dollars a share. 

   Mr. Murdoch also said he believes the proposed buy-out is "the right thing to do for Fairfax and for the family." 

   John Fairfax Ltd. publishes many of the major newspapers in Australia, including the Sydney Morning Herald, the Melbourne Age, the Canberra Times and the Australian Financial Review. 
It also publishes dozens of smaller newspapers and magazines. 
It owns radio stations, but recently sold its television interests. 

   In other countries, John Fairfax Ltd. publishes the Spectator weekly newsmagazine in Britain and the National Business Review daily in New Zealand. 
It is starting a teen-agers' magazine in the U.S. 

   Warwick Fairfax is a son of the late Sir Warwick Fairfax, who was chairman of John Fairfax Ltd. Warwick is brother and heir of James Fairfax, the company's current chairman. 

   Funding for the cash part of the takeover bid is being provided by Australia &amp; New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. 

   Meanwhile, Mr. Murdoch told the securities institute that profit of News Corp. is likely to reach at least 450 million dollars in the year ended June 30, 1988, but he said that prediction is "very tentative." 
That figure would represent a 23% increase from the 366 million-dollar profit posted by News Corp. in the year ended last June 30. 

   Separately, News Corp. yesterday announced a bid for the 48.7% of Advertiser Newspapers Ltd. that it doesn't already own. 
Advertiser publishes the main newspaper in the Australian city of Adelaide. 

   Mr. Murdoch's company offered Advertiser shareholders nine dollars a share or a reduction of capital through an arrangement that will cancel the shares and return nine dollars a share to holders. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
