ID: 262	RANK: 11	SCORE: 18.545870
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880615-0121 </DOCNO>
<HL> Zowie! Newspapers Poll Readers on Comic Strips </HL>
<AUTHOR> Kathleen A. Hughes (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PUB </IN>
<TEXT>
   Newspaper editors only seem cavalier when they dump your favorite comic strip -- the one you've been following faithfully for 23 years -- and substitute some dumb cartoon with stupid gag lines and chicken-scratch drawings. 

   Actually, they live in fear of the "squeal factor" -- the public outcry that nearly always follows the disappearance of a comic. 

   When the Chicago Tribune dropped one longtime strip, "Winnie Winkle," about a middle-aged woman juggling career and family, 2,000 readers called to complain, says Bill McHugh, the paper's comics coordinator. 
"We had to put the comic back in immediately," he recalls. 

   Comics remain among newspapers' most popular features, read by about 75% of their audience. 
Syndicates offer more than 300 strips, and new favorites such as "Calvin &amp; Hobbes" keep popping up. 
But in recent years, as newsprint prices have climbed, many papers have reduced the size of their comics sections. 
So, editors have to stay on their toes. 

   To gain a competitive edge, a growing number of newspapers are taking a more scientific approach to their comics. 
Through detailed surveys, they are trying to learn which comics their readers like. 
And they are using the results to reshape their comics pages, often adding strips targeted to specific demographic groups. 

   "For many years comic strips were decided by editors, but now more papers are surveying their readers," says Ron Patel, an associate managing editor of the Philadelphia Inquirer. 
"Editors are often 30- to 50-year-old men, and they don't have the same sense of humor as other groups." 

   The survey results have spurred many newspapers to run fewer strips with continuing, soap-opera plots, while single-panel cartoons, such as "The Far Side," have multiplied. 
Off-beat comics and strips that appeal to women, like "Sally Forth" and "Cathy," have also gained. 
And more papers are trying to hook a group that mostly spurns today's comics: children. 

   Of course, some of the oldest comics are still the most popular, and some of those haven't changed much in decades. 
"Blondie," a 57-year-old strip, is one of the 10 most popular comic strips in the country, based on 1987 figures from Feature Research Inc. showing how many newspapers run various strips. 
"Peanuts," "Beetle Bailey" and "Doonesbury" also rank in the top 10. 

   Readership surveys don't always protect editors from the squeal factor. 
The Houston Post last year dropped "Prince Valiant," an adventure strip loosely based on the legend of Camelot, after it fared poorly in surveys. 
More than 500 readers quickly complained. 
"The response surprised us," says Ernest Williamson, managing editor. 
"There was nothing to indicate it would be that overwhelming." 
The prince made a quick comeback. 

   Still, newspapers are finding that readers respond to their comics surveys with surprising enthusiasm. 
Last fall, the Houston Chronicle used a market-research firm to poll readers about its comics, and 20,000 responded -- paying their own postage. 
"People didn't just fill in the blanks," says Susan Bischoff, assistant managing editor. 
"They sent lengthy letters." 

   The results, which appeared in the paper in January, showed that the readers' favorite comic was "Calvin &amp; Hobbes," a strip about a small boy's adventure fantasies with his tiger -- to all the world a stuffed animal, but to Calvin very real. 
The Chronicle plans to make changes this summer based on the survey, though Ms. Bischoff doesn't give details. 

   The San Diego Union also conducted an extensive comics survey last fall with the help of a local market-research firm. 
Readers were asked which of the paper's 19 comics they liked and disliked. 
They also got to vote on 14 strips the editors were considering adding, and they could suggest others. 

   Almost 18,000 readers responded. 
After reviewing the results, the paper added "Sally Forth," "Luann" (about a teen-age girl), "Cathy" and "Funky Winkerbean" (about a high school band teacher). 
It dropped "Heathcliff" (the adventures of a cat) and "Tank McNamara" (about a television sports commentator). 

   Some newspapers say their market research indicated they should run more comics for children. 
The Philadelphia Inquirer, for one, recently added "Phil and Del," in which the characters "do stupid things like throw pies at each other," says Mr. Patel, the associate managing editor. 
The paper's hope is that the comics will make children regular readers who stay with the paper as they grow older. 

   In the past year, the Rocky Mountain News has added "Biography," which features drawings of rock stars and other celebrities who appeal to the younger set, and "Comics for Kids," which offers tidbits from puzzles to facts on nature to comics with a fox and a mouse. 

   Despite newspapers' interest in targeting different demographic groups, few comics reflect racial or ethnic diversity. 
So in February, the Detroit Free Press began urging syndicators and cartoonists to include more minority characters. 
The paper also launched a cartoon talent search in Detroit's public shools. 

   To emphasize its point, the Free Press studied its own comics pages for a month. 
It found that they featured 5,250 white characters and 31 black characters. 

   "The preponderance of people who draw comic strips are white folks," says David Lawrence, publisher and chairman of the Free Press. 
"People tend to promote people like themselves and to draw people like themselves." 

   Some strips are integrated, but newspaper editors say they don't perform well in surveys. 
When the Rocky Mountain News recently dropped a strip featuring a black family, "The Middletons," it got fewer than 100 calls-a low squeal factor. 
"Wee Pals," a strip featuring minorities, appears in only 75 daily papers, compared with about 1,200 for "Blondie," according to King Features Syndicate. 

   Some people think many of the cartoons aimed at demographic groups aren't funny anyway. 
"Someone at a syndicate says they don't have anything for new mothers over 35 going back to work, and they pick out a market-segment comic strip" aimed at that group, says Rosalie Muller Wright, assistant managing editor for features at the San Francisco Chronicle. 
She says most strips chosen this way "stink." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
