ID: 262	RANK: 36	SCORE: 15.724959
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871103-0138 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Bookshelf: Adult Cartoons
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 11/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Cartoon" has become a term of abuse. 
People say "cartoon" when they mean a meager, juvenile, incomplete or simplified version of something more sophisticated or profound. 
For example, people who admired Bret Easton Ellis's novel "Less Than Zero" are almost certain to say that the film of it just coming out is a mere cartoon version of the book. 
On the other hand, people who hated the book have typically dismissed its drug-besotted, sexually debauched, aimless cast of Los Angeles teen-agers as cartoon characters from the lower depths -- when they weren't putting them down as "less than zeroes." 

   The trouble with using the word "cartoon" to bash things we don't like is that every time we do it, we're implicitly demeaning cartoons. 
And the bland assumption that all cartoons are childish or trivial is itself, if you will, a cartoon version of "cartoon." 
They don't laugh about cartoons at the Ringling Museum in Sarasota, Fla., or at the British Museum in London, both of which are proud as Punch of their cartoons by Rubens and Raphael respectively. 
These are cartoons in the most exalted sense of the word: full-scale paintings created as final working models for tapestries -- the Rubens series is in Madrid, the Raphael in the Vatican. 

   Coming down to earth only a bit, one reaches the world of the topical cartoon, the journalistic world of Honore Daumier, Thomas Nast, Bill Mauldin and dozens of gifted New Yorker artists from Saul Steinberg to Peter Arno to Edward Koren. 
None of these cartoonists was or is a trifler, and no one would ever say that they have produced "cartoon" versions of life, in the pejorative sense. 
Where the trouble comes is with cartoons in the form of comic strips. 
Although certain fanatics do insist that every frame of every "Aquaman" or "Dick Tracy" strip is up there with the Sistine ceiling, few adults could bear to reread the comics they loved as children. 
The content really is a cartoon version of life, in the pejorative sense. 
But the style and the graphic syntax of the comic strip is not intrinsically childish. 
All over the world, serious artists have been adapting this form to their adult sensibilities. 
This global movement has not prospered in this country until recently, but with the publication of Art Spiegelman's powerful cartoon novel "Maus" last year, American readers had a chance to see the broad possibilities of the cartoon medium. 
"Maus" told the story of how Mr. Spiegelman's Jewish parents hid from the Nazis but were finally rounded up and sent off to the hell of Hitler's holocaust. 
A sequel, presumably set in the death camps, is scheduled to appear in 1988. 

   But in the meantime, Mr. Spiegelman's publisher, Pantheon, is bringing out an anthology drawn from Mr. Spiegelman and Francoise Mouly's hip and often macabre cartoon magazine RAW. "Read Yourself RAW" (89 pages, $14.95), edited by Mr. Spiegelman and Ms. Mouly, is a king-size showcase for new-wave cartoonists from all over the world. 
The oldest is a hunting fantasy from a Le Figaro of 1897 by Caran d'Ache. 
The others, all more recent, range from the Belgian Ever Meulen's lewd and diabolical reworking of a perennial idea ("What's Wrong With This Picture") to the French Jacques Tardi's visit to New York's Times Square underbelly to the American Charles Burns's send-up of cartoon heroism, "Dogboy". (This superhero doesn't leap tall buildings at a single bound. 
He had a canine heart transplant and licks and sniffs women when they attract him.) 

   Not all of these extracts tell conventional stories. 
Mr. Spiegelman is represented by two RAW covers and a comic strip in which the frames are connected only by a coherent style and related imagery. 
But every one of the artists in this anthology has built on the styles and mannerisms of more mundane commercial comic strips -- the word-filled balloons, the grid of frames. 
This is the visual system against which they bounce their imaginations. 

   To see how far this can go, take a look at Pantheon's other current Spiegelman/Mouly production, "Agony" (173 pages, $7.95), by Mark Beyer. 
Mr. Beyer's hapless couple, Amy and Jordan, also appear in "Read Yourself RAW," but here their horrible misfortunes stretch on to book length, from the Arctic to the belly of a predatory fish in a public aquarium. 
Mr. Beyer is having fun (if that's the word for so much suffering) with the comic-strip tradition of characters that constantly bounce back from dismemberment and other usually fatal misadventures. 
But he goes beyond what Hollywood saw fit to show children. 
Here Amy's head mysteriously swells until she's too big to leave the room. 
Jordan lances her with a toothpick. 
Blood floods the apartment. 
They flee town. 
On the next page, a few months later, they are toting a dead bear on a pole in the forest. 
Mr. Beyer's deliberately childish drawing style makes all this even eerier. 
The achingly bright colors on the jacket of this five-inch square paperback will also make you wince with the pleasure of finding out where your childhood experiences had really been leading. 
Don't laugh. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
