ID: 262	RANK: 58	SCORE: 14.550496
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870330-0098 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Funnies Lady: Cartoonist Lynn Johnston
---
By Peggy Berkowitz</HL>
<DD> 03/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Corbeil, Ontario  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Nine-year-old Katie Johnston leans on her family's dining-room table and confides that sometimes "it's sort of hard" having a mother who's a well-known cartoonist. 

   Schoolmates, for example, ask for her mother's autograph, but she isn't allowed to take the signatures to school. 
"I don't like to disappoint them," she tells a visitor. 

   Her 13-year-old brother, Aaron, butts in to disagree. 
He says his sister was cut off from autograph supplies because she "wanted to sell them!" 

   That tit-for-tat could have come right out of "For Better or For Worse," the popular cartoon strip created by their mom, Lynn Johnston. 
It's carried by more than 480 North American newspapers, and 40 others around the world. 

   In a highly competitive field, the 39-year-old Canadian has won fame by culling amusing and sometimes poignant insights of family life from her own experience. 
"It tends to be more autobiographical than other strips," says Lee Salem, editorial director at Universal Press Syndicate, which distributes her cartoon. 

   Unlike most cartoonists, Mrs. Johnston isn't afraid to let her characters, the Patterson family, grow older. 
To save her son and daughter some embarrassment, she portrays the cartoon children, Michael and Lizzie, as three years younger than her own. 
Still, Aaron doesn't read the daily strip and tries to ignore his alter ego. 
"I like to think it's just Michael Patterson," he says. 

   The Johnstons live in a comfortable log house on 127 acres of wooded, lakeside property here not far from North Bay (population 51,000), where snow covers the ground five months a year. 
Toronto is more than 200 miles to the south. 
Still, Mrs. Johnston's views of parenthood strike a chord with readers all over the U.S. 
"The fact that we live in the north doesn't distinguish us," says Mrs. Johnston. 
The Pattersons "are just a suburban family, really." 

   Mrs. Johnston is prettier than Elly, her cartoon impersonation, and seems less oppressed by the weight of parenthood. 
But she has the same honey-colored hair that falls in a bob to her slouched shoulders. 
Like Elly, she likes to gossip, worries about gaining weight while sneaking cookies, and occasionally barks at her kids. 

   And she readily admits she's just as insecure as Elly. 
She craves affection from the public and respect from her peers, but doesn't believe she deserves it. 
Last year, as the first woman to be voted "Cartoonist of the Year" by the (U.S.) 
National Cartoonists Society, she was so overcome she couldn't work for two weeks afterward. 
"You feel as though you'll never be able to live up to it," she says. 

   Born Lynn Ridgway, the daughter of a small-town watchmaker, she always hoped to make her living drawing. 
As a medical artist at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, she began doing lots of cartoon illustrations "to keep bored students awake." 

   In 1972, she quit her job when she became pregnant with Aaron during her first marriage. 
She found that the waiting on the examining table for her obstetrician was interminable. 
At the doctor's invitation, she drew cartoons for the ceiling of his examining room. 
They were later published as a book, "David, We're Pregnant." 
Two collections later -- both humorous looks at parenting -- she was invited to try her hand at a daily strip by Universal Press Syndicate, with which she eventually signed a 20-year contract. 

   Until three years ago, the Johnstons lived in a remote settlement in far northern Manitoba, where her husband was a flying dentist. 
Here in the comparative tropics of rural Ontario, Mrs. Johnston can still lead a normal north-country life. 
She pumps her own gas and waits in line with her groceries at the local supermarket, where she's recognized only when she signs a check. 
When the mail delays the strip's arrival to the local newspaper, the North Bay Nugget, she delivers a copy. 

   South of the border, she is a household word. 
In a recent Chicago Tribune opinion poll about 38 comic strips, "For Better or For Worse" was the second most-read (after Peanuts), and first among female readers. 
Mrs. Johnston attributes part of the strip's appeal to her willingness to display her own weaknesses. 
She says, "I'll admit to the world through Elly that I hated my nose forever and ever and then everybody in the whole world who ever hated their nose can say, 'Right!'" 

   She also draws on her friends and relatives for inspiration. 
Mrs. Johnston's own trumpet-playing brother, Alan, was annoyed when his cartoon counterpart, Phil, moved in with a girlfriend before Alan did. 
"Alan literally took me by the neck," she remembers, "and said 'If you have Phil marry her before I do, I'll kill you.'" (Phil is preparing for the big day right now in the strip, but Alan tied the knot last summer.) 

   Her own marriage is an even richer source for the strip. 
Mrs. Johnston often interrupts a marital argument to jot down a particularly good line, says her husband, Rod. 
He is an affable, sloppily dressed dentist just like his cartoon counterpart. 
He says his wife's six-figure income makes him a "kept man," but he still likes to practice dentistry, which provides fodder for the family strip. 
Once he was lost in the wilderness for two days after an airplane accident and feared dead; his wife eventually turned the incident into a cartoon episode. 

   "She isn't afraid of sadness," said Charles Schulz, creator of Peanuts, in a foreword to a Johnston collection. 
Indeed, Mrs. Johnston is currently planning a series about her mother's successful bout with cancer. 

   "There isn't a day that goes by that we don't say to ourselves how lucky we are," says Mrs. Johnston, pouring tea from a large, two-spouted teapot that she commissioned from a local potter. 
Mr. Johnston, whose latest project is disguising the downstairs bathroom as an old-fashioned outhouse, shows off a hopping toy that he brought back from Toronto. 
"I have one of the few wives," he says, "who are thrilled when I bring something stupid like this home. 
She has this great sense of humor." 

   ---
   Ms. Berkowitz is a reporter in the Journal's Ottawa bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
