ID: 319	RANK: 71	SCORE: 24.037472
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890821-0053 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890821 </DD>
<AN> 890821-0053. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
@  On Sports: Travers Stakes
@  ----
@  By Frederick C. Klein </HL>
<DD> 08/21/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> Saratoga Springs, N.Y.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Is Easy Goer the horse of the year? 
Maybe so, maybe not. 
Sunday Silence, his conqueror in the Kentucky Derby and Preakness, chewed oats in California last weekend, perhaps contemplating revenge for his defeat by E.G. in last June's Belmont Stakes. 
Perhaps, though, Sunday Silence was merely contemplating his oats. 
One never knows. 

   S.S. could have come to the sitzbath capital of upstate New York in search of the $653,100 first prize that the Saratoga folks were offering to the winner of Saturday's Travers Stakes, its ancient showpiece race for three-year-olds, but he didn't. 
In his absence, Easy Goer bagged the winner's check, beating the front-running Clever Trevor to the wire by a widening three lengths over 1 1/4 miles. 

   The victory was fully expected by an overflow throng of 49,000, which made Easy Goer a 1-to-5 favorite in a six-horse field. 
That produced a return of $2.40 on a $2 win bet and made such tickets as valuable as souvenirs as in bills and coins. 
Payout-window lines, however, indicated that most winners were cashing theirs. 

   The New York Racing Association, eager to hype its attractions, annually spices the Travers by pointing to all the notable favorites that have lost it. 
The list is impressive, including such as Tom Fool, Affirmed, Conquistador Cielo and Alysheba. 
On the other hand, Man o' War, Whirlaway, Native Dancer and Buckpasser all won it as the people's choices, and favorites have triumphed in 41 of the last 87 goes, a proportion well in excess of the national average of about 33%. 
The reputation of the race as a favorite's graveyard seems to be peculiarly a perception of New Yorkers, who deem it a scandal anytime a favorite is beaten. 

   That 49,000 people would show up for a race in a town whose usual population is 26,000 illustrates the extent of the Gothamite invasion. 
Saratoga is where New York horseplayers go to rusticate in August, and the place certainly is a change from the big city's asphalt acres. 
Victorian mansions with broad front porches line Union Avenue outside the track, and one can easily conjure up visions of broad-beamed gentlemen and bustled ladies fanning themselves thereon. 

   There are stepping stones in front of the track's grandstand entrance for any carriage trade that may happen along, and chalk boards on the premises also bespeak an earlier era. 
In the paddock and the adjacent and ample picnic area, one can tread on real dirt and be shaded by real trees. 
People lounge on blankets and lawn chairs. 
The ambience smacks of a country fair. 

   An enlightened track policy allows racegoers to bring along coolers bearing various alcoholic beverages, and these were consumed with moderation everywhere I looked. 
This is in contrast with Churchill Downs on Kentucky Derby day, where the confiscation of alcohol at the gates forces patrons to pay up for those awful mint juleps inside, and, perhaps relatedly, drunkenness is rampant. 

   At the same time, Saratoga is up to date enough to make wandering New Yorkers feel at home. 
Signs in front of several of the manses proclaim them to have been condo-ized, the track offers Pick Six and trifecta wagering along with other new-fangled betting gimmicks, and lines everywhere are Manhattan-long. 
Shut Out is known hereabouts not only as the winner of the 1942 Travers, but also, uncapitalized, as the fate of would-be bettors who tarry. 

   Easy Goer tarried not a bit on Saturday, and his time of 2:00 4/5 was the third-fastest in an affair that dates from 1864. 
The handsome chestnut colt's sole serious competition, both on form and in actuality, was Clever Trevor, a high-pocketed product of Oklahoma. 
He was handled easily. 

   The afternoon's real suspense was provided not by any of Easy Goer's equine foes but by the threat of rain; E.G.'s two most-celebrated defeats in a 14-race, 10-win career came on muddy tracks at Churchill Downs, first in the Breeder's Cup event for two-year-olds last November, and again in May's Kentucky Derby. 

   Saturday's weather forecast called for showers, but they held off until about 20 minutes after the Travers was completed, an indication that the Man Upstairs liked this particular favorite as much as the local fancy. 

   Another threat to the winner came from adoring fans who cheered his every movement from barn to paddock to racetrack. 
Easy Goer was distracted by the commotion, reared while being saddled and had to be calmed. 
"Running the race seemed easy after that," noted Pat Day. 

   Clever Trevor's shot depended on his getting far enough ahead to negate Easy Goer's stretch drive, but that was not to be. 
Clever Trevor was dogged from the outset by Roi Danzig and never led by more than two lengths. 
Easy Goer overtook Clever Trevor in the homestretch, hesitated for a moment, then pulled away after a whip-tap from Day. 
Roi Danzig faded to last; Shy Tom, a member of the D. Wayne Lukas-trained phalanx, was third. 

   Post-race testimony had to do largely with E.G.'s place in history. 
Owner Ogden Phipps also was the proprietor of the great Buckpasser, who won the '66 Travers. 
He declined any direct comparison, but said that Easy Goer won his Travers more easily than Buckpasser had. 
Trainer C.R. "Shug" McGaughey noted that Easy Goer had posted three straight wins since losing the Preakness, and opined that this should meet the criterion for consistency. 
"We didn't go to the bottom of the barrel with the horse" even with his near-record clocking, offered jockey Day. 

   Easy Goer and Sunday Silence are scheduled to follow separate paths until, probably, the Breeder's Cup in November at Gulfstream Park in Florida. 
That oughta be a good one. 

   Meantime, as workmen picked up the debris left by the huge crowd, a woman remarked to a companion that the scene reminded her of Woodstock 20 years ago. 
"Yeah, Woodstock with pari-mutuel tickets," the fella said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
