ID: 97	RANK: 39	SCORE: 4.418067
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870409-0161 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Film: Love and the Single Android
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 04/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Frankie, the heroine of "Making Mr. Right," is a tough and efficient, but pointedly feminine, executive -- a throwback to the "career gals" of '50s comedies (Kay Thompson's fashion mag editor in "Funny Face" comes to mind). 
Wearing a striking black and red dress and matching shoes, Frankie dashes into a meeting. 
"Hi gentleman. 
Sorry to keep you waiting," she says, a little breathlessly. 
"I'm always late." 
Then, coyly: "But I'm worth it." 

   Like almost everything else about "Making Mr. Right," Frankie is both post-modern and retro. 
She's settled for an exciting career and a humdrum boyfriend, but she still harbors fantasies about the perfect man -- the kind Hollywood has always awarded its romantic-comedy heroines. 
But she discovers that the only way to find a perfect man these days is in the lab: Mr. Right is an android. 

   More on him later. 
In Frankie, at least, director Susan Seidelman and comedienne Ann Magnuson have created a great character. 
Physically, Ms. Magnuson -- a performance artist and actress -- could be Shirley MacLaine's daughter or Michael J. Fox's sister, with her crinkly eyes and wise-guy gumption. 
She's got the smart girl's version of what they used to call "it." 
If this, her first major film role, is any indication, the husky-voiced charmer is off to a promising movie career. 

   Director Seidelman is still something of a cinematic debutante herself. (This is her third film.) 
One of only a handful of female directors working in Hollywood, she casts an affectionate, amused eye on the foibles of modern women better and more acutely than anyone else making movies today. 
During the opening credits of "Desperately Seeking Susan," her last film, she showed us women sitting under hairdryers, painting their toenails, having their legs waxed. 

   As "Making Mr. Right" opens, we see Frankie driving her red convertible to work (she's late), shaving her armpits with an electric razor. 
When she's down in the dumps, she takes solace in a pint of ice cream and a Diet Coke. 

   Whenever Frankie is at center stage, especially during the spry first half of this likable picture, Ms. Seidelman keeps a firm grip on her light comedy -- without squashing the froth. 
She shot the picture among the old Art Deco hotels of lower Collins Avenue in Miami Beach, a nice backdrop for the story's wistful yet ironic vision of romance. 
Cinematographer Edward Lachman heightens the nostalgic aura with his "dated" Technicolor-bright light (the same look he gave David Byrne's "True Stories"). 

   Like Mr. Byrne, Ms. Seidelman uses her bemused fascination with TV as a running joke (a good one) throughout the movie. 
Almost everyone ends up plopped down in front of a TV -- or on it, as part of a story on the nightly news everyone else is watching. 
Frankie's best friend is the unhappy wife of a daytime television hunk, the star of "New Jersey," a soap opera specializing in sadomasochistic episodes. 
There is good music here, too, in the fine, inventive score with its electro-Latino beat. 

   Ms. Seidelman has picked up a lot of technique since she made "Smithereens," a low-budget, imaginative picture about a New Jersey girl hanging around the punk scene of Lower Manhattan, waiting to become famous. 
"Making Mr. Right" is her slickest movie -- and also her least satisfying. 
It has plenty of charm, but loses its snap along the way. 
The story, by Floyd Byars and Laurie Frank, flounders among subplots meant to enhance the good-man-is-hard-to-find theme. 

   However, the more serious problem lies with Mr. Right himself. 
John Malkovich plays two parts: Dr. Peters, the scientist who isn't mad, just a woman-hater, and Ulysses, the sweet, sentimental android. 
Frankie, an "image consultant," meets them both after she's hired to sell the idea of sending Ulysses on a space mission to the public. 

   Either because of the way the scientist's part is written, or the way Mr. Malkovich plays it, or both, Dr. Peters is too much of an airheaded Caspar Milquetoast to be a plausible villain, too insubstantial to serve as a satirical vision of the "perfectly" unemotional man. 

   As Ulysses, the soft-hearted android, Mr. Malkovich radiates the placid serenity of someone who's undergone a frontal lobotomy. 
He sighs at stars and utters banalities about the wonders of the world in a very soft voice. 
That's all very nice, but you never for a minute believe that this goofy bag of motor parts could be anyone's dream man. 

   But if Mr. Right isn't all he's cracked up to be, his girlfriend is worth a detour all by herself. 

   ---
   If nothing else, "The Secret of My Success" is certainly the trendiest movie of the moment. 

   It stars Michael J. Fox, the cute, clean-cut heart throb of teens and grandmas alike. 
It was co-authored with A.J. Carothers by Jim Cash and Jack Epps Jr., the "hot" screenwriting team of "Legal Eagles" and "Top Gun." 

   At a time when Hollywood is remaking French bedroom farces with U.S. stars, "The Secret of My Success" skipped the bothersome translation problems: It's a home-grown bedroom farce. 
Trendiest of all is the central plot device: a hostile takeover. 

   Mr. Fox gamely runs through his paces as the young man from Kansas who quickly proceeds to the top of the corporate ladder. 
He's charming, but seems much younger than he is and should be spared from having to play romantic leading man. 
Helen Slater is sweet, but a little bland, as the pretty Harvard-trained executive and love interest. 
What all of this adds up to is a harmless, if lazy, little frolic. 
I say lazy because the picture skips along, as it should, then pauses -- far too long, long enough to kill the comic momentum. 
Then it skips again. 
And pauses again. 
And so on. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
