ID: 97	RANK: 47	SCORE: 4.342520
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870804-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
'Lipsticks and Lords': Yale's New Look
---
By Julie V. Iovine</HL>
<DD> 08/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   I didn't bother returning last summer for my 10th Yale reunion because I still live part of each year in New Haven. 
I even thought I knew what was going on until Sara Cohen, class of '88, started talking about the "lipsticks" and the "crunchies." 
The former, she explains, are Yale's radical-chic lesbians; the latter, "the granola dykes who have old-fashioned utopian ideas about feminism." 
Then there are the assimilationists, gay men mostly, who don't want to draw attention to their sexuality, and a growing number of special-interest factions, like the new Chicano-lesbian group. 
Suddenly Yale has a reputation as a gay school: Last spring, while most campus-wide social activities withered away under Connecticut's new legal drinking age of 21, 1,000 students attended the annual gay-lesbian ball. 

   Before entering Yale in '85, Stephanie Black had never met a gay person. 
Now, she says, "It's just a matter of your friends being blond, brunette, gay or straight. 
No big deal. 
It probably depends on what part of the country you're from, whether or not you're going to be surprised by two women making out in the library." 
Ms. Cohen says she received a notice before registering freshman year that said one in four Yale students was gay. 
That would put it on a par with San Francisco. 

   Verifiable statistics don't exist, but everyone agrees that the gay community's superb organization has increased its visibility at Yale. 
So have the fashion statements of the lesbians on campus. 
When I met Ms. Cohen, a self-proclaimed lipstick, she wore a white silk Pierrot outfit with a black leather baseball cap, dead-white face powder, opaque sunglasses and magic-marker-red lipstick. 
And it's not just the clothes that shock: When I asked Ms. Cohen about Wayne Dick {a student who altered Gay and Lesbian Awareness Days (GLAD) posters to read Bestiality Awareness Days (BAD)}, she countered, "What's wrong with a little bestiality?" 

   In recent years, GLAD week has become the major public event for the gay community. 
In my time, you were supposed to wear a pink triangle for a day or two to express solidarity; gay or straight, not many dared do it. 
Last year, a drag parade launched GLAD week -- followed by eight days of lectures, performances, films, readings, tea with Allen Ginsberg, and a cabaret act by sometime-exhibitionist Karen Finley. 
Plans to set up the country's First Gay-Lesbian Institute this fall were also announced. 
"In these anti-sex times, I guess the radical thing is to be pro-sex," says Carrie Costello, an '86 graduate who plans to become a gay-family lawyer. 

   Another respect in which times have changed is partying. 
Under the new drinking law, less than one-fifth of the student body can drink legally in public. 
At first, students say, the administration turned a blind eye to the party scene, but last year's death of sophomore Ted McGuire from alcoholic poisoning changed that. 

   Social life on campus has subsequently retreated to a furtiveness last seen during Prohibition. 
No more huge bashes with dining-hall floors reeking from spilled beer and courtyards given over to the all-night concocting of strawberry daiquiris. 
Students are still drinking as much, possibly more, than ever; only now, they get soaked privately in their rooms before going out. 
Then, for thrills, they might go to a bowling or ice-skating party. 
Better yet, they join one of the fraternities. 

   Fraternities? 
"You thought panty raids only happened in Doris Day films?" an associate professor asks. 
"Well, come back to Yale." 
A student recently reeled off for me the names of 12 reconstituted sororities and fraternities (only one had managed to stick it out through the '60s and '70s), including two black fraternities and one fraternity that admits girls who don't like the tea-sipping connotation of sororities. 
The block of tenement houses behind the gym, where once only punks, drug dealers and drama students dared live, is today known to all as Frat Row. 

   Far from calling fraternities a symptom of a pervasive conservative backlash, every student I asked credits the drinking law alone for the subsequent social fragmentation that has triggered their revival and the creation of new social clubs. 
Conservative is hardly the term, though, for the Rockingham Club. 
Brideshead Relocated perhaps. 
Established in 1981 by then-freshman Lord Nicholas Wentworth Hervey, as the charter says, "to transfer the finest of British traditions to a safe haven . . .," the Rockingham Club soon acquired a reputation as an absolutely exclusive reserve for monied or titled -- preferably both -- young, male Eurocrats. 

   One night last spring I was invited for dinner. 
Upon arrival, I found the boys upstairs shooting pool and drinking champagne. 
A few women dressed in retro cocktail dresses, tight and flouncy, with pearls, sat clustered on a couch flipping through picture albums of club outings to England and Vail. 
I'd already been informed that "Rock wenches" were there only to get their M.R.S., a phrase I never expected to hear applied in real life. 
Since Lord Hervey graduated in '86 (the six-foot-high, three-foot-wide portrait he commissioned of himself -- a cigarette jutting 3-D from his mouth -- stands as constant inspiration in the stairwell), the European recruits have dwindled to an untitled few, and newer members are trying to cast off the shadow of elitism. 
"As long as they're exceptionally amusing, anyone is eligible to join," one young fogey tells me loftily. 
But as for admitting women, "the ones we'd really want probably wouldn't have anything to do with us." 

   At 10 p.m., waiters served dinner at a long linen-decked table (candelabra and place cards included) straddling two rooms. 
After the requisitely pompous toasts and cheers, the food started flying. 
Rolls, string beans, butter. 
"It's in the public-school tradition," the fellow to my right explains, dodging a roll that clips me on the chin and pointing to the permanent splatter-marks on the wall behind the presidential seat. 
Throughout, the incumbent president kept up a steady, albeit appropriately jaded, patter. 
"I'm a little weary of it all," he confides. ". . . 
Anyway, now there are so many other things more important than partying. 
Look, I don't even press my dress shirt properly anymore." 

   Indeed, more pressing issues are now in the making as the campus anticipates what may well turn out to be the main event of the year -- a strike by the dining hall and clerical workers' unions. 
Juniors and seniors dread a repeat of the 1984 strike, when workers picketing in front of the library shouted, "You're walking on the bodies of dead women." 
President Bart Giamatti resigned relatively soon after the strike was settled. 
Before long, posters around campus asked "Where's Benno?," a pointed comment on the low visibility of Yale's new president, Benno Schmidt. 

   This year's strike, threatened for January, is going to be an important confrontation for him. 
It's rumored that a law firm known for strike-busting has already been hired, but students are still uncertain if Mr. Schmidt has enough savvy to handle the situation and keep the dining halls open. 

   What I find myself wondering about is how a university as old and established as Yale can still have the energy to transform itself so utterly every 10 years. 
Remember the Black Panther trials? 
The only remaining constants seem to be "Clapping for Credit" and "Nuts and Sluts" -- gut courses in music and sociology. 
Oh, yes, and the study "grind" of yesteryear has been rechristened "the tweeb," while the hot major is history, with the adventurous going for -- get ready -- English, where the deconstructionists and new-Marxists reside. 
Who knows what this year will bring? 
Maybe the Whiffenpoofs will finally admit women. 

   ---
   Ms. Iovine is a free-lance writer married to a member of the Yale faculty. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
