ID: 97	RANK: 69	SCORE: 4.197410
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871203-0006 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Opera Lyubimov's 'Lulu,' Met's 'Travatore'
---
By Manuela Hoelterhoff</HL>
<DD> 12/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Chicago  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Hunched over a coffee table in an office at the Chicago Lyric Opera, Soviet director Yuri Lyubimov is slurring his words and contorting his face into a spooky imitation of Leonid Brezhnev that would make the dead chief's bushy eyebrows whirl from the grave. 

   "Immoral," Brezhnev growls out of the side of a frozen mouth. 
"Not worthy. 
Our people don't need it." 

   Mr. Lyubimov dons the comrade's guise to explain why he would never have gotten to stage Alban Berg's opera "Lulu" in his native country. 
Only in a capitalist town like Chicago could he show the bawdy demimonde of pre-1917 capitalist Europe through which Lulu sways and slinks until, poor trull, she picks up Jack the Ripper. 

   Mr. Lyubimov is in Chicago partly because he wanted to polish a production he'd already staged in Turin, Italy, and partly because he can't go home anyhow. 
For 20 years, he was director of Moscow's hip Taganka Theater, staging plays that teetered provocatively between the acceptable and the avant-garde. 
But he lost the theater, his Party membership and citizenship in 1984 after using a visit to London to say he was tired of being censored by bureaucratic clods back home and that the regime left a lot to be desired. 

   Now, this rather courtly 70-year-old nonperson and enemy of the state lives in Israel, though he commutes regularly to Europe, where his stark, politically acute productions have made him the toast and terror of the opera world. 
Soprano Gabriela Benackova, for instance, isn't singing his praises. 
She fled from London's Covent Garden last season, after taking one look at the bleak "Jenufa" sets she did not want to root herself in front of. 
And in a "Rigoletto" for Florence's Teatro Comunale, Piero Cappuccilli grumpily dumped his hump, when he realized he would be sharing the stage with dummies representing Don Quixote, Charlie Chaplin and Adolf Hitler. (They were Mr. Lyubimov's quirky way of stressing the work's tyrant/fool relationship.) 

   "You don't need me if all you want are glorious voices and nice costumes," he says so emphatically that his shaggy white hair starts falling on his black-rimmed glasses like little curtains. 
He likes long rehearsal periods and singers who don't demand to tell him their view of their roles (which isn't easy anyhow, since Mr. Lyubimov speaks hardly a word of English and directs with a translator by his side). 

   Going into rehearsal, he typically brings a model of the set to familiarize the cast with his concept. 
An actor himself until age 45, he will demonstrate exactly what movement and gestures he expects. 
At the Taganka, he interlaced his plays with music and insisted his actors also sing. 
Now, staging operas (which he was never permitted to do in the Soviet Union), he demands that his singers act. 
He raves about his "Lulu" cast: "There was never a moment when a singer said I cannot breathe and walk at the same time." 

   This is no small feat considering Berg's 1930s music is difficult for opera singers trained almost exclusively on the predictable tonal music of the previous century. 
But if he didn't provide Mr. Lyubimov with hummable tunes, Berg did supply atmosphere, and what we saw at the premiere last week was a spellbinding fusion of word, music, movement and design (by David Borovsky, another Taganka regular). 
Vividly, sumptuously conducted by Dennis Russell Davies, this is a striking "Lulu" at once sordid and funny, hallucinatory and grittily real. 

   As the opera begins, a huge grate that covers the orchestra pit is slowly raised, turning the stage into a cage. 
Lined up behind bars are the people who try to enslave Lulu with their sexual fantasies: a doctor, a lesbian countess, a playwright, a bum, an athlete, a schoolboy. 
Lulu gets around in three acts. 

   Lowered again, the grate gives way to a multilevel steel frame with compartments that often open up on beautifully lit scenes planted with palm trees. 
Mostly, though, the visual effects are derived from movement and gesture. 
There, for instance, is baritone Victor Braun, whose stiff-jointed walk symbolizes the society stalwart's ossified heart without sinking to a caricature. 
There is the athlete, Richard Cowan, mindlessly cartwheeling through the scenery. 
There is also, regrettably, Evelyn Lear (once a Lulu, now grown, as it were, into the role of the Countess), frumpy in appearance, woofy in tone. 
You were not inclined to dispute her statement of years ago that singing Lulu had damaged her voice. 

   Maybe this same fate will someday afflict Catherine Malfitano, but last week she sounded brilliantly at ease in jagged vocal lines that usually have sopranos shrieking into the night. 
Mr. Lyubimov keeps her moving constantly, turning, bending, stretching. 
He seems to view Lulu as a frustrated artist, a dancer who wants to stand on her own two feet and have a career -- a dubious proposition, surely, but one that brings a unifying, serpentine line to the stage, as Ms. Malfitano goes through an impressive repertoire of barre exercises that should make her a little less plump by the time she sings the part at the Metropolitan Opera this spring. 

   Possibly still lacking is a sense of whimsy. 
Some nutty lines fell flat. 
"Isn't this the sofa on which your father bled to death?" she asks Alwa (Jacque Trussel), while he, poor thing, is trying to get her attention by pushing his head into her lap. 
Ms. Malfitano doesn't always convey Lulu's disconnected weirdness, but this is a multifaceted, ultimately impossible role, and you can't have everything. 
She gave us a lot. 

   Mr. Lyubimov contributes some wryness of his own by eliminating the opera's major prop: A portrait of Lulu in a Pierrot costume that is painted in the first scene, then admired by others and finally used by Countess Geschwitz as a kind of altar. 
Here tenor Michael Myers paints the air on an empty easel -- everybody has an ideal image of Lulu in their head anyhow. 
Not much, though, was gained by inventing a Pierrot character to carry Lulu around -- no doubt a Significant Symbol to Mr. Lyubimov but one I didn't get. 
With 26 characters on stage, you don't need further complications. 

   An ovation at the opera's end sent Mr. Lyubimov on to his other engagements: to Israel for Bertolt Brecht's play, "The Good Woman of Szechuan," a Wagner "Ring" cycle at Covent Garden, a "Tannhauser" in Stuttgart. 
And just maybe he will visit the Soviet Union, provided he has a return ticket. 
His Taganka company has sent a letter to Mr. Gorbachev asking to have its old director back. 
But Mr. Gorbachev has yet to respond. 

   "Perhaps the ex-actor could intercede for this ex-actor," he says, amused at the notion of Ronald Reagan adding him to the summit agenda. 

   ---
   Adding Mr. Lyubimov to the Met's agenda might have helped save that company's new "Trovatore." 
The Verdi opera bumbled in recently in a production so stupid, the audience finished the unhappy evening by screaming abuse at the director (Fabrizio Melano), the designer (Ezio Frigerio) and the Azucena (mezzo Livia Budai, who has since left the country). 

   The two principals, Dame Joan Sutherland and tenor Luciano Pavarotti, were forced to trudge up and down staircases that would test the agility of a monkey. 
Negotiating the fiery music proved equally difficult, though they've earned our forbearance, which baritone Leo Nucci has not. 
He sang evil Count di Luna with a squeezed baritone and a smile so wide I thought he'd won a toaster oven from the Anvil Chorus, which was banging out pots and pans on a dark landing. 

   I mention this travesty because Ms. Budai's sudden replacement for the next two performances is another visitor from Moscow, Bolshoi mezzo Elena Obraztsova. 
Though a much-decorated Party pet, she had her own run-in with Moscow's cultural bureaucracy a few years ago when she said the Bolshoi is a boring company with a provincial repertoire. 
But glasnost wafted her toward Carnegie Hall last week for her first New York appearance in eight years, and when the Met offered her Ms. Budai's tear-stained costume, she readily agreed to wear it. 

   Maybe a voice that could stop a Soviet tank in its tracks will liven up this deadly array of stairs, columns and unhappy flesh. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
