ID: 97	RANK: 71	SCORE: 4.194198
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870803-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
Daring to Be Different
---
By Robert Goldberg</HL>
<DD> 08/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   It's exciting to see a TV show push at the boundaries of the little screen. 
It's even more exciting to see one poke right through. 
"Alive From Off Center" (Mondays at 10 p.m. on PBS; Sundays at 10:30 p.m. on WNET/Thirteen) is a quirky grab bag of avant-garde performers. 
This season, it will present 10 half-hour selections of offbeat comedy, punk choreography, explosive music and experimental video techniques, as technologically startling as they are visually appealing. 

   Created by KCTA (Minneapolis/St. 
Paul), "Alive" is in its third season. 
Because most of the material is now original, "Alive" can truly be said to define a whole new genre of network television -- the electronic stage. 
Mixing high art and popular entertainment, blurring traditional boundaries, blending all of the arts into performance -- with host/artist/composer Laurie Anderson, commedia dell'arte clown/dancer/mime Bill Irwin, and director/choreographer/composer Meredith Monk -- this program is a cross-cultural-multimedia extravaganza that television is uniquely well suited to present. 

   Two of the shows especially worth blocking out time to watch are Eric Bogosian's "Funhouse," airing Aug. 10 (Aug. 16 on WNET/Thirteen), and Meredith Monk's "Ellis Island," airing Sept. 7 (Sept. 13 on WNET/Thirteen). 

   Half dramatic, half stand-up comic, Mr. Bogosian works in the Whoopi Goldberg/Lily Tomlin mold, creating his characters through monologues. 
But his humor is darker than either's, more biting, and his ear for tone more exact. 
He can play a genial instructor tutoring interrogation methods with an avuncular charm: "Now just push his head under the water, nice and deep. . . . 
Keep a grip on the back of the neck, cause they do buck a bit." 
As a hearty salesman, pitching life insurance to an uninterested customer, he comments: "Well, Mr. Stearns, let's say you and the missis go to see a play in New York. 
You come out, you get mugged, a gun goes off, you get a bullet in the brain -- have you thought about that, Mr. Stearns?" 

   Mr. Bogosian peoples his world with malevolent punks and gutter drunks and mass murderers. 
"It's crazy," says his bag man, reeling out a wonderful Kerouac-style word riff: "It's a mad house, it's a fun house, it's a jungle, it's dog eat dog, man eat man, eat to be eaten, hunt to be hunted. 
It's the letter of the law, the law of the land, the land is a jungle." 

   Where Eric Bogosian is brutally witty, Meredith Monk is gentle and lyrical. 
Her "Ellis Island" is a video portrait of the gateway to America for 16 million immigrants. 
Starting from poignant black-and-white snapshots of newly arrived foreigners, Ms. Monk brings the photos to life to show the loneliness and confusion of strangers in a strange land. 

   Ms. Monk terms this piece "a ghost story," and so it is: "Ellis Island" is a remembrance of a bewildering, often degrading, place, the "Isle of Tears," and the simple, sweet dignity of the immigrants who passed through. 

   "Ellis Island" also makes a strong case for the validity of mixed-media performance, when the mixing is done by someone as capable and experienced as Ms. Monk. 
Her chanting music, her sometimes frenetic, sometimes frozen choreography, her faded black-and-white images of the past and the color images of today's island with its peeling walls and deserted rooms interweave past and present into a haunting tribute. 

   Not all of the "Alive" programs are as good as this, though. 
Most, in fact, are flawed. 
New vaudevillian Bill Irwin's "As Seen on TV" offers only amusing moments instead of the sustained genius of his stage show, "The Regard of Flight." 
Likewise, Zbigniew Rybczynski's "Steps," an enjoyable tale about a group of American tourists who wander into the famous Odessa Steps sequence in Sergei Eisenstein's "Battleship Potemkin," is basically a one-joke show. 
And "The Flood," Jaap Drupsteen's version of Igor Stravinsky's 1962 television opera, is disjointed and halting. 

   But for all of these programs, there is a saving grace. 
All are as visually exciting as anything currently on network TV. "Steps," for example, shows some amazing recent video technology that allows new footage to be blended into pre-existing film. 
Punks, starlets and real estate brokers actually wander in and out among Eisenstein's characters. 
"The Flood" skillfully combines hypermodern graphics and computer projections, live actors and 3-D animation. 

   Yet all of the "Alive" shows tread the fine line between experimentation and excess. 
"Geography," a collaboration between dancer/choreographer Molissa Fenley and video artists John Sanborn and Mary Perillo, is a good example of this. 
Set in New Mexico's Painted Desert, "Geography" features camera work as athletic as the dance movements themselves -- quick pans and dolly shots that cover yards and yards. 
Camera and dance merge into something breathless and daring. 

   But when the screen is cut into ninths (with a foot, a leg, an arm in each section), when the camera arches from ankle level up overhead, shooting straight down, and then over to the other side, looking upside down -- well, it's a bit much. 

   But then again, where else on TV do you see something so outrageous, something that forces you to look at the screen in a new way? 
"Geography," like most of these shows, grabs the viewer by the collar and shakes hard. 
After 10 years of "Love Boat" reruns, that can only be a good thing. 

   Maybe "Alive From Off Center" isn't for everybody. 
Maybe it doesn't always work. 
But it's great that this series exists, that for one half-hour a week there is something so completely different on TV, something so sure to annoy so many people. 
The Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation and the National Endowment for the Arts deserve recognition for funding it. 

   "Alive From Off Center" makes me excited about the possibilities of television in a way that few shows have. 
It's entertainment that actually has a brain, intelligent programming that's actually fun. 
It's also new, not a rehashing of Puccini or Shakespeare or Balanchine, but new music, new choreography, new drama. 

   Of course there are serious flaws: There are plenty of moments that are slow, silly or just plain incomprehensible. 
But what this program proves is that television can be more than game shows and sitcoms -- that TV has a huge potential, a marvelous potential. 
"Alive From Off Center" is far from perfect. 
But it's a great start. 

   ---
   Mr. Goldberg watches television in New York City. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
