ID: 97	RANK: 82	SCORE: 4.134273
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861230-0113 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Opera:
From Vienna to Carnegie Hall on (Bat) Wings of Song
---
By Manuela Hoelterhoff</HL>
<DD> 12/30/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Metropolitan Opera's new production of "Die Fledermaus" (The Bat) which will be telecast live from the company's stage by PBS on New Year's Eve, is a lot like one of those gigantic Christmas packages you keep unwrapping and unwrapping, layer after layer, box after box, and then when you've littered the entire living room with bows and paper, all you get is a pair of socks. 

   Not since the company's "Tosca" have sets put on such a show. 
The ballroom whirls around like a cake assortment on a lazy susan at Demel's. 
It is fabulous. 
So is the Eisenstein apartment that makes a Mark Hampton interior look impoverished. 
Costumes, masks and coiffures are also lavishly imaginative. 
But dead inside all this gift wrapping is the titular creature's tiny, mothballed body, reeking of old jokes and bad ideas. 

   Johann Strauss isn't to blame. 
His music still enchants and amuses more than 100 years after its Viennese premiere. 
"Fledermaus" remains the masterpiece of the operetta genre: a sophisticated bit of froth concocted around the financier Gabriel von Eisenstein who, on the way to jail, stops off at a splashy party where he bumps into Adele, his maid, and woos a Hungarian countess who turns out to be his masked wife, Rosalinde. 

   Director Otto Schenk makes "Fledermaus" as funny as "Fidelio." 
His idea of humor is to have people spit water at each other. 
I had thought Charles Ludlam's Santa Fe "Fledermaus" last summer excessively mugged. 
I now appreciate it as a masterpiece of comic invention compared with this schnitzel prepared by an Austrian who so obviously has directed "Fledermaus" so many times he could only dump some leftover morsels on the stage of the Met. 
Add this "Fledermaus" to the list of Met productions done by expensive directors who have already lavished their freshest ideas on productions of the same piece in European opera houses. 

   Perhaps Kiri Te Kanawa will shine herself up a bit for the telecast. 
Let us hope. 
At the premiere she was very much out of voice and, made to do undignified things like rub her stomach, turned in a morose Rosalinde. 
The others in the cast were bad or bland, with even Tatiana Troyanos, who usually takes to cross-dressing like a duck to water, just standing around as Prince Orlofsky. 
Of course, nobody received much inspiration from conductor Jeffrey Tate. 
As he labored through the score he gave us the audio equivalent of a square peg in a round hole. 

   Still, the company finally does have a pretty production and may some season find a better-directed ensemble to put inside it. 
I'd wait and take my party hat to "La Boheme," also currently on the boards in the wonderful, five-year-old staging by Franco Zeffirelli. 
Only Paris itself offers more scenic pleasures than the Met's festive Cafe Momus, and that snowy inn would have made Utrillo drop his bottle and reach for his brush. 
What I noticed again on a recent visit is how singer-friendly this often grandly scaled production is. 
So carefully keyed are the sets and lighting to the opera's moods, that they can bolster the expressive potential of moderately gifted artists. 

   A skimpier production might have made more obvious the insufficiencies of Denes Gulyas's fragile tenor or Leona Mitchell's inability to convey much pathos with her smoothly pretty voice. 
But when he sang of building castles in the air while perched high above Paris in his eyrie of a garret, the effect was exhilaratingly picturesque. 
And when she stood there in the lonely chilliness of the third act, the set's wistful, pearl-gray tonalities helped fill in a few emotional blanks. 
Enhanced further by Barbara Daniels's entertaining and precisely sung Musetta, this "Boheme" puts us into the same cheerful mood as those bustling Christmas shoppers thronging around the Cafe Momus. 

   ---
   Of the newer singers much is being made of soprano Susan Dunn of Arkansas. 
The first time I heard her sing more than an aria was at La Scala last spring in a hilarious performance of "Aida" that featured a Rumanian tenor who forgot the melody to "Celeste Aida" and was helped out by a humming audience. 
The chunky Ms. Dunn suffered no such misfortune as she sang to the receptive Milanese. 
Her vocal potential seemed considerable, though her phrasing was often dull and she had no idea what to do with any part of her body. 
She rolled onstage looking rather like an RV with a sunset on the door. 

   Her appearance on Dec. 12 in the Verdi Requiem at Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall was very impressive. 
She faltered briefly in the Recordare but then floated clear to sing with an unusual combination of high gloss and honey. (The timbre brings to mind Margaret Price.) 
Suddenly the world of Verdi operas looked a lot less empty and bleak. 

   Two of her colleagues matched her singing: Shirley Verrett, in polished vocal estate, and Luciano Pavarotti, whose tenor continues to sound fresh and unfettered. 
With Zubin Mehta leading the New York Philharmonic, this earth-and-heaven-trembling work made an overwhelming impact. 

   On Jan. 4, Ms. Dunn ventures into Carnegie Hall to sing Richard Strauss's "Four Last Songs" with the American Symphony Orchestra. 
How she will fare in such an emotionally demanding repertoire is as engrossing a question as how the newly refurbished hall itself will respond to the solo voice. 

   ---
   The venerable auditorium reopened two weeks ago after a six-month intermission with a very long and odd concert. 
A motley assortment of talent faced an elite audience turning slowly blue from icy blasts meant to cool the equipment brought by enough television crews to cover a long war. 

   By the time Frank Sinatra had embellished his song medley with a request for a drink, we had heard from Leonard Bernstein, Marilyn Horne, Isaac Stern, Vladimir Horowitz, Zubin Mehta and Yo-Yo Ma -- not all in festive form. 
And we had seen rather a lot of stagehands pushing equipment, instruments, chairs and stands at a merciless andante pace. 
A drink? 
We were ready for an entire liquor store. 

   It was hard to believe that this somnolent event was planned by the same people who'd remodeled Carnegie Hall in such record time. 
Particularly impressive is the transformed lobby, which now looks like a properly dignified entrance instead of a railway waiting room in Irkutsk. 
The claustrophobia-causing central stairs leading off from the lobby have been removed to the sides; the circular corridor behind the orchestra now has been opened up to look out over the lobby -- adding happy opportunities for people watching. 

   The interior sparkles with stucco and gilt, and the proscenium is no longer draped in a mousy curtain. 
To illuminate the stage (the lights used to be hidden behind the curtain), architect James Polshek designed a handsome fixture that suggests the outline of what might symbolize a boat in a Robert Wilson stage set. 

   The acoustics? 
Well, I had always thought Carnegie's acoustic reputation a trifle exaggerated. 
This is, after all, a theater where you can hear subways rumbling through fortissimo passages. 
Still, the basic sound seemed to me as warm and liquid as before, though others are muttering about a reduced bass dimension. 
Given the white noise produced by the television myrmidons, comment should probably await a future visit. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
