ID: 143	RANK: 16	SCORE: 12.774581

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06046238 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06046238 </ACCESS>
<DESCRIPT>  MOVIE; REVIEW; BRIEF  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  Glenn Lovell reviews films on a scale of no stars to 4.; Alice.  Woody Allen's
droll-to-silly blending of "Alice in Wonderland" and "The Invisible Man" has
moments of genuine charm -- compliments of Mia Farrow and Joe Mantegna's
uptown lovers -- but this is definitely lesser Allen, a haphazard splicing of
ideas retrieved from "Manhattan," "Hannah and Her Sisters," etc. Look for Alec
Baldwin as a fast-lane ghost, Cybill Shepherd as a can't-be-bothered friend,
William Hurt as Alice's huffy husband. PG-13 (adult situations). (star)(star)
1/2  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Weekend  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  FILM MINI-REVIEWS  </HEADLINE>
<TEXT>     Awakenings.  What constitutes sleep, of a physical or spiritual nature?
That's question director Penny Marshall ponders in this downbeat, rigorously
clinical re-telling of Rip Van Winkle fable. Robin Williams, at his most
mannered, plays nerd neurologist who happens upon similarities in "sleeping"
patients at Brooklyn hospital; Robert De Niro is patient who undergoes
miraculous "Charly" cure. Scrupulously understated but still manipulative,
predictable. PG-13. (star)(star) 1/2;    Cyrano de Bergerac.  Edmond Rostand's
oft-told tale of bravery, balcony deceit and the nose "that launched a
thousand ships" gets glorious, cast-of-thousands treatment in this robust
French adaptation. Gerard Depardieu stars as famed swordsman, poet and
braggart; Anne Brochet, Vincent Perez play Roxane and Christian, the young
lovers. Beautifully designed, choreographed and directed. PG (violent
swordplay). (star)(star)(star)(star);    Dances With Wolves.  Kevin Costner's
sprawling tribute to the vanishing frontier is old-fashioned epic movie-making
at its best. Borrowing from William Wyler and Akira Kurosawa, Costner has
created a rich tapestry of adventures among the Sioux Indians, circa 1865.
Costner heads an excellent ensemble as titular character, a by-the-book
military man reborn as a Sioux warrior. Adapted by Michael Blake from his own
novel; music by John Barry. PG-13 (for violence). (star)(star)(star)(star);   
Edward Scissorhands.  Or: Hans Christian Andersen Meets Frankenstein.
"Batman"/"Beetlejuice" creator Tim Burton here delivers a quirky,
sweet-natured little fable about a man-made boy who wasn't quite finished by
his inventor. Johnny Depp brings Chaplinesque poignancy to the title role;
Diane Wiest, Winona Ryder, Alan Arkin are deadpan and dead-on as the suburban
family that adopts Edward. Vincent Price is glimpsed in flashbacks as Edward's
creator. PG-13 (for violence; may be too intense for some children).
(star)(star)(star) 1/2;    The Field.  Craggy Irish setting and robust lead by
a white-bearded Richard Harris can't save this heavy-handed adaptation of John
B. Keane play about a blustery farmer's battle for a bit of pasture. Harris
gives a good accounting of himself as appropriately named "Bull" McCabe, but
Brenda Fricker, Sean Bean and John Hurt as village idiot appear to have
wandered in from an overwrought D.H. Lawrence saga about family guilt and
smoldering passion. Directed, scripted by Jim Sheridan of "My Left Foot."
PG-13 (slight violence). (star)(star);    Flight of the Intruder.  Gung-ho,
boldly mounted adaptation of Stephen Coonts' best-seller about a rogue mission
to bomb Hanoi. Brad Johnson brings charisma and a certain Duke Wayne swagger
to the vigilante carrier pilot; Willem Dafoe, Danny Glover co-star,
respectively, as Johnson's war-crazy bombardier and mock-tough squadron
leader. PG-13 (combat violence, profanity). (star)(star)(star);    The
Godfather III.  Francis Coppola picks up story of Michael Corleone (Al Pacino)
in late '70s, as family seeks respectability through Vatican business
ventures. Standing in the way are Sonny Corleone's hot-headed son (Andy
Garcia) and old-style Mafioso rivals who still live by the gun. Beautifully
mounted with moody, Oscar-worthy cinematography, but overall final installment
is downbeat, derivative. With Talia Shire, Diane Keaton, Sophia Coppola. R
(violence, profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Green Card.  Sparkling interplay
between France's Gerard Depardieu and Andie MacDowell turn what could have
been fluff piece into a very spirited and surprising comedy-romance. Depardieu
plays ne'er-do-well composer who weds MacDowell to confound immigrations and
stay in New York. Directed, scripted by Australia's Peter Weir. PG-13.
(star)(star)(star);    The Grifters.  Gritty, downbeat Jim Thompson's novel
about trio of con artists who out-con themselves becomes buoyant, sexy film
noir caper in British director Stephen ("Dangerous Liaisons") Frears' hands.
Anjelica Huston (now a platinum blonde), John Cusack, Annette Bening star as
catty mother, unlucky son and conspiring girlfriend. Pat Hingle, Henry Jones,
J.T. Walsh are among colorful supporting players. R (nudity, profanity,
violence). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;    Hamlet.  Franco Zeffirelli, who
popularized the Bard's "Romeo and Juliet" in the '60s, returns with a robust,
albeit severely pared down, version of Shakespeare's most famous tragedy. Mel
Gibson shows new range and depth as a now mostly seething Prince of Denmark,
determined to trap his father's assassins. Glenn Close, Alan Bates, Paul
Scofield, Ian Holm and Helena Bonham-Carter co-star. Handsome production that
stirs the senses without taxing the gray matter. PG (violent swordplay).
(star)(star) 1/2;    Hidden Agenda.  Gritty, riveting conspiracy thriller
about the murder of American civil-liberties lawyer in Northern Ireland and
complicity of British intelligence. Yanks Brad Dourif, Frances McDormand get
top billing, but real star is Brian Cox, cast as a top government investigator
who vows not to take sides between IRA and occupying troops. Top-notch all the
way. R (profanity, violence). (star)(star)(star);    Home Alone.  Macaulay
Culkin, the cherubic wiseacre of "Uncle Buck," plays an accidentally abandoned
8-year-old who protects hearth and home from a pair of bungling burglars on
Christmas eve. Joe Pesci, Daniel Stern are the Mutt and Jeff second-story men.
Directed by Chris Columbus from a script by John ("Breakfast Club") Hughes. PG
(slight profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Kindergarten Cop.  "Twins"
collaborators Ivan Reitman and Arnie Schwarzenegger reteam for a clever
amalgam of cop thriller and kiddie comedy. Arnie plays obsessed cop who goes
undercover as substitute teacher to ferret out (quite literally) the son and
estranged wife of a killer. Pamela Reed, Carroll Baker co-star. PG-13 (may be
too intense for children under 6). (star)(star) 1/2;    L.A. Story.  Steve
Martin shares his love/hate feelings for La La Land in this loony,
surprisingly mushy fable that owes more of a debt than Martin cares to
acknowledge to Fellini and Woody Allen. Such obvious targets as health fads,
freeway gridlock, happy-talk news teams come under assault. Martin, who also
scripted, co-stars with real-life wife Victoria Tennant and an all-knowing
electronic freeway sign. PG-13 (profanity, comic lovemaking). (star)(star);   
Meet the Applegates.  Ed Begley Jr., Stockard Channing co-star as Dick and
Jane Applegate, endangered South American beetles who disguise themselves as
humans and, with kids in tow, migrate to suburban Ohio. Sporadically funny
goof on consumerism, racism, pollution, etc., by team that brought us
infinitely more irreverent "Heathers." Sorry, guys, Saturday Night Live's
Coneheads have already mined this material. R (but could be PG-13 for
profanity). (star) 1/2;    Mermaids.  Cher tones down her standard bohemian
act for this kooky mother-daughter comedy set in New England in 1963.
Ubiquitous Winona Ryder plays the perpetually mortified daughter, who dreams
of Catholic sainthood; Bob Hoskins brings his usual good-natured bluster to
role of shoe-salesman suitor. Director Richard Benjamin's best since "My
Favorite Year." PG-13 (for language). (star)(star)(star);    Misery.  Stephen
King's darkest yarn becomes sunnier -- and funnier -- thriller in the hands of
director Rob Reiner and screenwriter William Goldman, collaborators on "The
Princess Bride." James Caan is severely injured romance novelist who's saved,
then enslaved, by his "No. 1 fan," a Rocky Mountains nut case played by Kathy
Bates. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Mr. and Mrs. Bridge. 
Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward co-star as members of Kansas City's upper crust
who, in their inimitable way, either skate around or ignore brewing crises,
which range from uppity kids to world war. Adapted from the Evan S. Connell
novels by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala and directed by James Ivory, team behind
"Maurice" and "A Room with a View." Yes, it's episodic and deliberately paced,
but the cumulative impact can be compared to that of a good Ingmar Bergman
movie. With Blythe Danner, Diane Kagan in key supporting roles. Whimsical,
melodrama-deflating score by Richard Robbins. PG-13 (adult themes).
(star)(star)(star)(star);    The Never Ending Story II: The Next Chapter. 
More action-packed sequel to 1984 kiddie favorite inspired by Michael Ende
book. Bookworm Bastian (now played by Jonathan Brandis) returns to parallel
world of Fantasia to battle evil enchantress and adult empathy. Falkor the
luckdragon and Rock Biter return with a whole new menagerie of characters.
Less pretentious and better designed than its predecessor. Billed with
hilarious new Bugs Bunny-Daffy Duck cartoon, "Box Office Bunny." PG (OK for
family). (star)(star)(star);    Not Without My Daughter.  Sally Field in
compelling, if brazenly manipulative, adaptation of Betty Mahmoody book about
how, in mid-'80s, she and daughter were held hostage in Tehran by her Iranian
husband. Film is perfectly poised to feed on anti-Middle East paranoia and
predictably depicts Iran as world's most oppressive society. PG-13 (too
intense for children). (star)(star)(star);    Once Around.  Quirky, beguiling
little comedy about a Boston family, the gosling daughter and the incredibly
pushy salesman-suitor who disrupts their lives. "Always" co-stars Richard
Dreyfuss and Holly Hunter are re-teamed as the jerk-who-came-to-dinner and the
desperate-to-wed daughter. Danny Aiello, Gena Rowland are wonderful as the
amazed, then exasperated, parents. Nicely directed by Sweden's Lasse Hallstrom
("My Life as a Dog") from a first script by Malia Scotch Marmo. R (for
profanity). (star)(star)(star);    The Rescuers Down Under.  Lightning paced
cliffhanger cartoon from Disney will put you in mind of Aussie-set "Pinocchio"
goosed up for the Indiana Jones generation. Sequel to '76 hit reteams Bianca
and Bernard, mice do-gooders who operate out of a United Nations for rodents.
Eva Gabor, Bob Newhart, John Candy, George C. Scott supplied the voices. G.
(star)(star)(star);    Run.  Old stranger-in-town idea dusted off as extremely
athletic workout for Patrick ("Loverboy") Dempsey, who, delivering on the
title, spends most of the picture dodging bullets and bad guys. Nothing
exceptional, but worthwhile for Dempsey's cocky performance and well-handled
action scenes. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star);    The Russia House. 
First-rate adaptation of John le Carre best-seller about boozy publisher (Sean
Connery) who's enlisted by British intelligence to win over Russian who's
telling all about his country's military shortcomings. Michelle Pfeiffer is
terrific as Connery's Moscow contact/love interest; Klaus Maria Brandauer, Roy
Scheider, James Fox co-star. Jerry Goldsmith's jazz score, like everything
else here, goes down like high-grade vodka. R (but could be PG-13) for
profanity. (star)(star)(star) 1/2;    The Sheltering Sky.  Seductive,
eye-filling adaptation of Paul Bowles' novel about bored Americans drifting
through post-war North Africa. Debra Winger, John Malkovich co-star as married
couple who debate our place in cosmos while bed-hopping from oasis to oasis.
Slow going but worthwhile for Vittorio Storaro's desert photography and
Ryuichi Sakamoto's brilliant score. Directed by Bernardo ("The Last Emperor")
Bertolucci. R (for nudity). (star)(star)(star);    The Silence of the Lambs. 
What should have been the thriller of the decade becomes, under Jonathan
Demme's too-polite direction, a rather slavish and somewhat confusing tale of
two psychos and the FBI trainee who uses one to track the other. Jodie Foster,
Anthony Hopkins co-star. Based on the loads creepier Thomas Harris novel. R
(violence, gruesome makeup effects). (star)(star) 1/2;    Sleeping with the
Enemy.  Julia ("Pretty Woman") Roberts returns as abused wife who stages her
own death, then takes a new identity in idyllic Midwestern burg. Patrick
Bergin, Kevin Anderson co-star as stalking husband and new beau, respectively.
Source novel took a stab at dealing with issue of abused wife reassembling her
life; movie reduces premise to slasher cliches. Directed by Joseph ("True
Believer") Ruben. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star);    Warlock.  Julian
Sands stars as evildoer of the title, a 17th-century satanist who's spirited,
"Terminator"-style, to late 20th-century Malibu. Familiar supernatural doings
and mediocre effects are helped by director Steve Miner's humorous approach
and Lori Singer's mouthy heroine. R (for gruesome makeup effects). (star)(star)  </TEXT>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910215  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Friday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  February  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  5D  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  1,992  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Friday February 15, 1991
00046238,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
