ID: 143	RANK: 17	SCORE: 12.672110

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06082060 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06082060 </ACCESS>
<DESCRIPT>  MOVIE; REVIEW  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  Glenn Lovell reviews films on a scale of no stars to 4.; Awakenings.  Penny
Marshall's downbeat, rigorously clinical re-telling of Rip Van Winkle fable.
Robin Williams, at his most mannered, plays nerd neurologist who happens upon
similarities in "sleeping" patients at Brooklyn hospital; Robert De Niro is
patient who undergoes miraculous "Charly" cure. Scrupulously understated but
still manipulative, predictable. PG-13. (star)(star) 1/2  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Weekend  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  FILM MINI-REVIEWS  </HEADLINE>
<TEXT>     Book of Love.  Another "Porky's"-type teen comedy, this one boasts
negligible distinction of being set in Scranton, Pa., during the '50s. Chris
Young, Keith Coogan play new kid in school and nerd sidekick. Director Robert
Shaye has fun bringing hero's daydreams to life, but overall this flashback
isn't hip enough by half. PG-13. (star) 1/2;    Bride of Re-Animator.  More
"morbid doodling" by Dr. Herbert West, whose iridescent-green serum brought
army of cadavers back to twitching life in 1985's "Re-Animator." Broader,
campier than original, but still lots of fun gross-outs, such as when
five-fingered what's-it escapes from basement lab. Jeffrey Combs, Bruce Abbott
reprise their roles as the Ivy League Frankenstein and reluctant, love-smitten
assistant. R (nudity, gruesome makeup effects.) (star)(star)(star);    Class
Action.  Gene Hackman, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio team up as father-daughter
San Francisco lawyers arguing opposite sides of corporate-negligence case.
Melodramatic generation-conflict script comes to thudding halt with
preposterous courtroom showdown. Save yourself the cash: Check out "L.A. Law"
on an off night. R (profanity). (star) 1/2;    Cyrano de Bergerac.  Edmond
Rostand's oft-told tale of bravery, balcony deceit and the nose "that launched
a thousand ships" gets glorious, cast-of-thousands treatment in this robust
French adaptation. Gerard Depardieu stars as famed swordsman, poet and
braggart; Anne Brochet, Vincent Perez play Roxane and Christian, the young
lovers. Beautifully designed, choreographed and directed. PG (violent
swordplay). (star)(star)(star)(star);    Dances with Wolves.  Kevin Costner's
sprawling tribute to the vanishing frontier is old-fashioned epic movie-making
at its best. Borrowing from William Wyler and Akira Kurosawa, Costner has
created a rich tapestry of adventures among the Sioux Indians, circa 1865.
PG-13 (for violence). (star)(star)(star)(star);    The Doors.  Oliver Stone's
frenzied, if simplistic, portrait of rocker Jim Morrison and the band that
defined moody sensuality of the '60s with "Light My Fire," "Riders on the
Storm," etc. Val Kilmer electrifies in later concert re-enactments. An
ambitious undertaking that comes closer than most rock biopix to capturing
spirit of times. R (profanity, nudity). (star)(star)(star);    Edward
Scissorhands.  Or: Hans Christian Andersen Meets Frankenstein.
"Batman"/"Beetlejuice" creator Tim Burton here delivers a quirky,
sweet-natured fable about a man-made boy who wasn't quite finished by his
inventor. Johnny Depp brings Chaplinesque poignancy to title role. PG-13
(violence; may be too intense for some children). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;   
Ghost.  An undisciplined mix of sappy romance and supernatural comedy, this
movie about a murdered lover (Patrick Swayze) trying to contact his girlfriend
(Demi Moore) with the help of an outrageous medium (Whoopi Goldberg) has some
very good moments. Rated PG-13 (brief profanity, violence). Reviewed by Tom
Sabulis. (star)(star) 1/2;    The Godfather III.  Francis Coppola picks up
story of Michael Corleone (Al Pacino) in late '70s, as family seeks
respectability through Vatican business ventures. Standing in the way are
Sonny Corleone's hot-headed son (Andy Garcia) and old-style Mafioso rivals who
still live by the gun. Beautifully mounted with Oscar-worthy cinematography,
but overall it's downbeat, derivative. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star)
1/2;    Green Card.  Sparkling interplay between France's Gerard Depardieu and
Andie MacDowell turn what could have been fluff piece into a very spirited and
surprising comedy-romance. Depardieu plays ne'er-do-well composer who weds
MacDowell to confound immigrations and stay in New York. Directed, scripted by
Australia's Peter Weir. PG-13. (star)(star)(star);    The Grifters.  Gritty,
downbeat Jim Thompson's novel about trio of con artists who out-con themselves
becomes buoyant, sexy film-noir caper in British director Stephen ("Dangerous
Liaisons") Frears' hands. Anjelica Huston (now a peroxide blonde), John
Cusack, Annette Bening star as catty mother, unlucky son and conspiring
girlfriend. R (nudity, profanity, violence). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;    Guilty
by Suspicion.  Clunky, old-fashioned melodrama about hot-shot director (Robert
De Niro) who's blacklisted for refusing to "name names" at the McCarthy
witch-hunt hearings. Surprisingly tame, given the incendiary material. Annette
Bening, George ("Cheers") Wendt co-star as De Niro's ex-wife and turncoat
friend. Directed, written by Irwin Winkler. PG-13 (slight profanity). (star)
1/2;    Hamlet.  Franco Zeffirelli, who popularized the Bard's "Romeo and
Juliet" in the '60s, returns with a robust, albeit severely pared down,
version of Shakespeare's most famous tragedy. Mel Gibson shows new range and
depth as a now mostly seething Prince of Denmark, determined to trap his
father's assassins. Glenn Close, Alan Bates, Paul Scofield, Ian Holm and
Helena Bonham-Carter co-star. Handsome production that stirs the senses
without taxing the gray matter. PG (violent swordplay). (star)(star) 1/2;   
The Hard Way.  Neat idea (obnoxious Hollywood star tails New York cop for
"research") is turned into proficient, occasionally laugh-out-loud-funny
comedy thanks to energetic, self-parodic performances by James Woods and
Michael J. Fox and typical whiz-bang direction by John ("Stakeout") Badham.
Alas, central antagonism goes soft and mushy. R (violence, profanity).
(star)(star) 1/2;    He Said, She Said.  Kevin Bacon, Elizabeth Perkins are
rival Baltimore journalists who become popular point/counterpoint TV
commentators -- until their romantic involvement takes its toll. A
sparkling-to-morose roundelay. The paranoid fantasies are fairly hilarious,
but instead of upending sexual stereotypes, they are reinforced. PG-13 (slight
profanity, nudity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Home Alone.  Macaulay Culkin, the
cherubic wiseacre of "Uncle Buck," plays an accidentally abandoned 8-year-old
who protects hearth and home from a pair of bungling burglars on Christmas
eve. PG (slight profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    If Looks Could Kill.  Nifty
espionage comedy starring likable Richard Grieco as high-school ne'er-do-well
who, during summer in Paris, is mistaken for a CIA operative. Linda Hunt,
Roger Rees have fun with the delightfully churlish archenemies intent on (you
got it!) world domination. Surprisingly fun, good-natured OO7 spoof. PG-13
(slight profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Ju Dou.  Controversial Oscar nominee
from China charts downfall of star-crossed lovers. Li Bao-Tian, Gong Li
co-star as laborer and "aunt" who bear a child every bit as autocratic and
unfeeling as the master/boss they attempt to con. Breathtakingly beautiful in
design, conception, but re-cycled film-noir plot bogs down all too quickly.
Directed by Zhang Yi-Mou. Exclusively San Francisco's Gateway. No MPAA rating
(could be PG-13 for adultery plot). (star)(star)(star);    Kindergarten Cop. 
"Twins" collaborators Ivan Reitman and Arnie Schwarzenegger reteam for a
clever amalgam of cop thriller and kiddie comedy. Arnie plays obsessed cop who
goes undercover as substitute teacher to ferret out (quite literally) the son
and estranged wife of a killer. PG-13 (may be too intense for children under
6). (star)(star) 1/2;    King Ralph.  John Goodman stars in a slap-sticky
comedy that never deviates from the obvious but is occasionally funny in spite
of itself. Ralph is a lounge singer who finds himself the next in line for the
British throne. Peter O'Toole walks through his role as the royal adviser. No
surprises here, but harmless and hilarious. PG (for profanity). Reviewed by
Knight-Ridder News Service. (star)(star)(star);    L.A. Story.  Steve Martin
shares his love/hate feelings for La La Land in this loony, romantic fable
that owes more of a debt than Martin cares to acknowledge to Fellini and Woody
Allen. Such obvious targets as health spas, freeway gridlock, happy-talk news
come under assault. Martin, who also scripted, co-stars with wife Victoria
Tennant and an all-knowing electronic freeway sign. PG-13 (profanity, comic
lovemaking). (star)(star);    The Nasty Girl.  Every German's complicity in
Nazi war crimes is again scrutinized in this Oscar nominee from Germany.
Michael Verhoeven combines romance, dark comedy to show how his homeland's
so-called "Economic Miracle" is built on hypocrisy and lies. Lena Stolze plays
an exuberant Pollyanna whose research for a national essay contest unearths
embarrassing secrets. No MPAA rating (could be PG-13).
(star)(star)(star)(star);    New Jack City.  Mario van Peebles directs the
story of a solitary cop who devotes his life to squashing drug dealers, and a
dealer so powerful he seems unsquashable. The two square off. R (for violence,
profanity, brief nudity, sex). Reviewed by Knight-Ridder Newspapers.
(star)(star)(star);    The Neverending Story II: The Next Chapter.  More
action-packed sequel to 1984 kiddie favorite inspired by Michael Ende book.
Bookworm Bastian (now played by Jonathan Brandis) returns to parallel world of
Fantasia to battle evil enchantress and adult empathy. Less pretentious and
better designed than its predecessor. PG (OK for family). (star)(star)(star); 
  Not Without My Daughter.  Sally Field in compelling, if brazenly
manipulative, adaptation of Betty Mahmoody book about how, in mid-'80s, she
and daughter were held hostage in Tehran by her Iranian husband. PG-13 (too
intense for children). (star)(star)(star);    Once Around.  Quirky, beguiling
little comedy about a Boston family, the gosling daughter and the pushy
salesman-suitor who disrupts their lives. "Always" co-stars Richard Dreyfuss
and Holly Hunter are re-teamed as the jerk-who-came-to-dinner and the
desperate-to-wed daughter. Danny Aiello, Gena Rowland are wonderful as the
parents. R (for profanity). (star)(star)(star);    The Rescuers Down Under. 
Lightning-paced cliffhanger cartoon from Disney will put you in mind of
Aussie-set "Pinocchio" goosed up for the Indiana Jones generation. Sequel to
'76 hit reteams Bianca and Bernard, mice do-gooders who operate out of a
United Nations for rodents. G. (star)(star)(star);    Robot Carnival. 
Animated anthology from Japan that has moments of inspiration (the wrap-around
sequence, Takashi Nakamura's "Nightmare") but, overall, is on a par with
trashy Saturday-morning superhero cartoons. "Starlight Angel" short, crammed
with Ken and Barbi facsimiles, is particularly hard to take. San Jose's Towne
Theater. No MPAA rating (could be PG-13 for scenes of apocalypse).
(star)(star);    Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead.  Tom Stoppard's
note-perfect, surprisingly visual adaptation of his own award-winning play,
which proffers worm's-eye view of doings at Elsinore castle as Hamlet plots
death of his father's killers. Gary Oldman, Tim Roth couldn't be better as the
title players who muddle on despite suspicion that they don't exist beyond
confines of Shakespeare's narrative. Richard Dreyfuss co-stars as lead Player
(aka Fate). PG. (star)(star)(star)(star);    Scenes From a Mall.  Woody Allen,
Bette Midler as husband and wife who learn of one another's infidelities on an
anniversary shopping trip. Allen appears distracted, and Midler seems muzzled
in this so-what satire by Paul Mazursky ("Down and Out in Beverly Hills"), who
has nothing new to say so rehashes all the old car-phone, beeper and sushi
jokes in yet another lame attempt at trashing La La Land. R (for profanity).
(star) 1/2;    The Silence of the Lambs.  What could have been ride of the
season becomes, under Jonathan Demme's almost polite direction, a slavish,
too-densely plotted adaptation of Thomas Harris novel about a pair of
dangerous sociopaths and the FBI trainee who uses one to track the other.
Jodie Foster is fine as novice agent who must suppress all traces of
femininity to earn respect in a man's profession; Anthony Hopkins, typically,
overdoes it, turning the caged Dr. Lecter into a reptilian wacko. R (violence,
gruesome makeup effects). (star)(star) 1/2;    Shipwrecked.  Crude but
entertaining return to "Treasure Island" territory, compliments of Disney.
Norway's Stian Smestad plays gung-ho youth who becomes more of a Rambo than
Robinson Crusoe when washed ashore on South Seas island; Gabriel Byrne fumes a
lot as pirate stand-in for Long John Silver. Shot in Fiji and Spain. PG.
(star)(star) 1/2;    Sleeping with the Enemy.  Julia ("Pretty Woman") Roberts
returns as abused wife who stages her own death, then takes a new identity in
idyllic Midwestern burg. Patrick Bergin, Kevin Anderson co-star as stalking
husband and new beau, respectively. Source novel took a stab at dealing with
issue of abused wife reassembling her life; movie reduces premise to slasher
cliches. Directed by Joseph ("True Believer") Ruben. R (violence, profanity).
(star)(star)  </TEXT>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910322  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Friday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  March  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  5E  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,022  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Friday March 22, 1991
00082060,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
