ID: 143	RANK: 19	SCORE: 12.373016

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06138181 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06138181 </ACCESS>
<DESCRIPT>  MOVIE; REVIEW; BRIEF  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  Glenn Lovell reviews films on a scale of no stars to 4.; Awakenings.  Penny
Marshall's downbeat, rigorously clinical re-telling of Rip Van Winkle fable.
Robin Williams, at his most mannered, plays nerd neurologist who happens upon
similarities in "sleeping" patients at Brooklyn hospital; Robert De Niro is
patient who undergoes miraculous "Charly" cure. Scrupulously understated but
still manipulative, predictable. PG-13. (star)(star) 1/2  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Weekend  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  FILM MINI-REVIEWS  </HEADLINE>
<TEXT>     Class Action.  Gene Hackman, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio team up as
father-daughter San Francisco lawyers arguing opposite sides of
corporate-negligence case. Melodramatic generation-conflict script comes to
thudding halt with preposterous courtroom showdown. Save yourself the cash:
Check out "L.A. Law" on an off night. R (profanity). (star) 1/2;    The
Comfort of Strangers.  Paul Schrader and Harold Pinter collaborated on this
sinuous, sensuous adaptation of Ian McEdwan's novel about foreigners in Venice
who fall under the spell of a couple into voyeurism, S&amp;M, etc. Rupert Everett,
Natasha Richardson play the perpetually lost tourists; Christopher Walken,
Helen Mirren have fun with the purposely over-the-top host and hostess. Dark,
unsettling, often rudely funny. R (for nudity, violence). (star)(star)(star)
1/2;    Dances with Wolves.  Kevin Costner's sprawling tribute to the
vanishing frontier is old-fashioned epic movie-making at its best. Borrowing
from William Wyler and Akira Kurosawa, Costner has created a rich tapestry of
adventures among the Sioux Indians, circa 1865. Costner plays a by-the-book
military man reborn as a Sioux warrior. Adapted by Michael Blake from his own
novel; music by John Barry. PG-13 (for violence). (star)(star)(star)(star);   
Defending Your Life.  Albert Brooks wrote, directed and stars in this droll
stroll through the hereafter, which now resembles an antiseptic industrial
park. Rip Torn is hilarious as lawyer charged with making Brooks' case in
heaven; Meryl Streep wings it on a smile and chuckle as our hero's celestial
love interest. Brooks' fulfills promise of "Lost in America" with this one. PG
(slight profanity). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;    The Doors.  Oliver Stone's
frenzied, if simplistic, portrait of rocker Jim Morrison and the band that
defined moody sensuality of the '60s with "Light My Fire," "Riders on the
Storm," etc. Val Kilmer electrifies in later concert re-enactments, but is
less convincing or interesting in scenes which attempt to pinpoint roots of
Morrison's mystic, dark-tinged music. With Meg Ryan and Kathleen Quinlan. R
(profanity, nudity). (star)(star)(star)Green Card.  Sparkling interplay
between France's Gerard Depardieu and Andie MacDowell turn what could have
been fluff piece into a very spirited and surprising comedy-romance. Depardieu
plays ne'er-do-well composer who weds MacDowell to confound immigrations and
stay in New York. Directed, scripted by Australia's Peter Weir. PG-13.
(star)(star)(star);    The Grifters.  Jim Thompson's novel about trio of con
artists who out-con themselves becomes buoyant, sexy film-noir caper in
British director Stephen ("Dangerous Liaisons") Frears' hands. Anjelica Huston
(now a peroxide blonde), John Cusack, Annette Bening star as catty mother,
unlucky son and conspiring girlfriend. R (nudity, profanity, violence).
(star)(star)(star) 1/2;    The Hard Way.  Neat idea (obnoxious Hollywood star
tails New York cop for "research") is turned into proficient, occasionally
laugh-out-loud-funny farce thanks to energetic, self-parodic performances by
James Woods and Michael J. Fox and typical whiz-bang direction by John
("Stakeout") Badham. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    If Looks
Could Kill.  Nifty espionage comedy starring likable Richard Grieco as
high-school ne'er-do-well who, during summer in Paris, is mistaken for a CIA
operative. Linda Hunt, Roger Rees have fun with the delightfully churlish
archenemies intent on (you got it!) world domination. PG-13 (slight
profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Journey of Hope.  Swiss Oscar-winner inspired
by news account of Turkish family that finds deceit, friendship, finally
tragedy on the road to Switzerland and "new beginning." Hardly the best of
this year's foreign-language nominees, it's still a work of quiet intensity
and undeniable integrity. There won't by a dry eye in the house during final
20 minutes. Directed Xavier Koller. No MPAA rating (could be PG)
(star)(star)(star);    Ju Dou.  Controversial Oscar nominee from China charts
downfall of star-crossed lovers. Li Bao-Tian, Gong Li co-star as laborer and
"aunt" who bear a child every bit as autocratic and unfeeling as the
master/boss they scorn. Breathtakingly beautiful, but re-cycled film-noir plot
bogs down all too quickly. Directed by Zhang Yi-Mou. No MPAA rating (could be
PG-13 for adultery plot). (star)(star)(star);    A Kiss Before Dying.  "Fatal
Attraction" author James Dearden's attempt at Hitchcockian thriller misfires
badly. Matt Dillon, Sean Young co-star as psychotic social climber and rich
twins high on killer's hit list (Young is doubly forgettable in dual roles).
Inserts from "Vertigo" only serve to remind how far from the mark this
ludicrous concoction is. Taken from Ira Levin novel, filmed in '56 with Joanne
Woodward, Robert Wagner. R (violence, slight nudity). (star);    La Femme
Nikita.  Luc Besson, of the stylish and empty "Subway" and "Big Blue," returns
with a sweet-to-savage policier that rates a "Wow!" for its visual
pyrotechnics and a "Huh?" for its idiotic story line, which mixes "My Fair
Lady" and "Dirty Harry." Anne Parillaud is the title character, a punkette
sociopath made over as government assassin. R (violence). (star)(star)(star); 
  L.A. Story.  Steve Martin shares his love/hate feelings for La La Land in
this loony, romantic fable that owes more of a debt than Martin cares to
acknowledge to Fellini and Woody Allen. Such obvious targets as health spas,
freeway gridlock, happy-talk news come under assault. Martin, who also
scripted, co-stars with real-life wife Victoria Tennant and an all-knowing
electronic freeway sign. PG-13 (profanity, comic lovemaking). (star)(star);   
The Long Walk Home.  The 1955 bus boycott in Montgomery, Ala., is dramatized
in this excellent character study co-starring Sissy Spacek and a never-better
Whoopi Goldberg as a suburban do-gooder and her quietly resentful black maid.
Both are forced to re-think priorities when their families are threatened in
different ways. Credit Richard ("Heartland") Pearce with the strong,
understated direction. One of the year's best! PG (for slight violence).
(star)(star)(star) 1/2;    Mister Johnson.  Rich, beautifully photographed and
acted adaptation of Joyce Cary novel about a happily unethical clerk who
serves his colonial "lords" in 1923 West Africa and earns their wrath in the
bargain. Maynard Eziashi is perfect as title character, who's as charming as
he is maddening; Pierce Brosnan, Edward Woodward are among the whites whose
paternal policies lead to tragedy. Directed by Bruce ("Driving Miss Daisy")
Beresford. PG-13 (but recommend for young teens). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;   
Mortal Thoughts.  Art-house darling Alan ("Choose Me") Rudolph returns with
his most commercial venture yet, a bleakly funny, blue-collar spin on French
classic "Diabolique." Demi Moore, Glenne Headly play Jersey wives involved in
mysterious (and mutually beneficial) homicides; Bruce Willis is the deserving
victim, an obnoxious wife-beater. With Harvey Keitel as cagey cop sorting out
the facts. Appropriately ominous jazz score by Mark Isham, who collaborated
with Rudolph on "Trouble in Mind." R (profanity, violence).
(star)(star)(star)(star);    New Jack City.  Mario Van Peebles makes solid
directorial debut with this blaxploitation spin on "Little Caesar." Wesley
Snipes, Ice-T co-star as Harlem drug czar and the undercover cop who vows to
infiltrate his cocaine factory. Hip, violent and energetic -- the rap
generation's answer to "Superfly." R (violence, profanity, nudity)
(star)(star) 1/2;    The Object of Beauty.  John Malkovich, Andie MacDowell
are perfectly paired as American lovers abroad who are seriously overextended,
financially and emotionally. They discover the truth about themselves and
their relationship when a small statue is filched. With Joss Ackland, Lolita
Davidovich and, as deaf-mute hotel maid, the sensational Rudi Davies.
Fashioned by Michael Lindsay-Hogg as comedy of manners with a bitter
aftertaste. R (profanity, slight nudity). (star)(star)(star);    One Good Cop.
 Or: Mr. Mom Joins the Force. Michael Keaton plays New York cop who becomes
guardian of three youngsters when his partner is gunned down. Keaton attempts
to skate by on charm and one-liners, but mix of "Father Knows Best" schmaltz
and street sadism takes it toll. Directed, written by Heywood Gould, former
cop reporter who wrote "Cocktail." R (violence, profanity). (star);    Oscar. 
Sly Stallone attempts a Damon Runyon fable with mixed results. Stallone
himself is humorously discombobulated as mobster attempting to go straight as
daughter plots to elope with chauffeur, accountant, linguistic coach --
whoever! But comic-opera approach (goosed by Rossini score) will either leave
you slapping your knee or pulling at your hair. Fun supporting cast includes
Peter Riegert, Kirk Doulgas, Don Ameche, hilariously prissy Tim Curry.
Directed by John Landis. PG (OK for entire family). (star)(star);    Out for
Justice.  Aikido champ Steven Seagal returns in his best cop thriller since
"Above the Law." Ultra-violent, single-minded script pits Seagal's Brooklyn
narc against wigged-out psycho from the old neighborhood (the baby-faced
William Forsythe). Credit the fluid, lightning-charged direction to grade-B
ace John ("Best Seller") Flynn. R (non-stop violence, profanity).
(star)(star)(star);    A Rage in Harlem.  Like the '50s Chester Himes novel on
which it's based, this gangland melodrama plies the sentimental and the
sadistic, the comic and depraved. Results are wildly uneven, but debuting
director Bill Dukes coaxes wonderfully quirky performances from blue-ribbon
cast, which includes Danny Glover, Zakes Mokae, Badja Djola and a deliciously
sultry Robin Givens. Forest Whitaker's pious stooge appears to have been
modeled after Jerry Lewis' patsy. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star)(star);
   The Silence of the Lambs.  What could have been ride of the season becomes,
under Jonathan Demme's almost polite direction, a slavish, too-densely plotted
adaptation of Thomas Harris novel about a pair of dangerous sociopaths and the
FBI trainee who uses one to track the other. Jodie Foster is fine as novice
agent who must suppress all traces of femininity to earn her stripes; Anthony
Hopkins, typically, overdoes it, turning the caged Dr. Lecter into a reptilian
wacko. R (violence, gruesome makeup effects). (star)(star) 1/2;   
Shipwrecked.  Crude but entertaining return to "Treasure Island" territory,
compliments of Disney. Norway's Stian Smestad plays gung-ho youth who becomes
more of a Rambo than Robinson Crusoe when washed ashore on South Seas island;
Gabriel Byrne fumes a lot as pirate stand-in for Long John Silver. Shot in
Fiji and Spain. PG. (star)(star) 1/2;    Sleeping with the Enemy.  Julia
("Pretty Woman") Roberts plays abused wife who stages her own death, then
takes a new identity in idyllic Iowa burg. Patrick Bergin, Kevin Anderson
co-star as stalking husband and new beau, respectively. Source novel took a
stab at dealing with issue of abused wife reassembling her life; movie reduces
premise to slasher cliches. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star);   
Spartacus.  Re-release of 1960 epic about slave uprising in ancient Rome still
packs wallop, thanks to cagey performances by Charles Laughton, Laurence
Olivier and especially Peter Ustinov and then-31-year-old Stanley Kubrick's
stylish way with gladiatorial bouts and climactic battle. Kirk Douglas mines
title character for pathos and angry defiance; Jean Simmons lends giddy,
earthy support as "Spartacus' woman." A wild blend of Fellini-esque decadence
and now-campy Hollywood excess. 70mm prints shrunk to splotchy 35mm for Bay
Area runs. PG-13 (violence). (star)(star)(star);    Switch.  Another
gender-change comedy a la "Tootsie," "All of Me," this time starring Ellen
Barkin as sexist pig named Steve who's reincarnated as foulmouthed, two-fisted
cookie named Amanda. Barkin is mostly hilarious in the lead, but
director-writer Blake Edwards doesn't know where to go with the premise.
Hence, this "liberated" comedy's oddly sexist, homophobic feel. With Jimmy
Smits, JoBeth Williams. R (for gratuitous profanity, nudity). (star)(star);   
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze.  Heroes in
Half-Shells return in broader, funnier sequel to their 1990 hit. Parents will
applaud decision to downplay the violence while lamenting the non-existent
plot. With Ernie Reyes Jr. as Turtles' new human ally, David Warner as
professor who deals in toxic waste, and some fun surprises from Jim Henson's
Creature Shop. PG (may be too intense for some children). (star)(star);    Toy
Soldiers.  Odd, unsettling blend of prep-school shenanigans and Rambo-esque
mayhem fro Mr. High Concept, Daniel ("Beverly Hills Cop") Petrie Jr., here
making directorial debut. Sean Astin, Wil Wheaton, Keith Coogan are among
rebellious rich kids who save Virginia academy from Columbian terrorists; Lou
Gossett Jr., Denholm Elliott are pushover dean and headmaster. Sort of like
"Full Metal Jacket" meets "Porky's." R (extreme violence, profanity). (star)
1/2  </TEXT>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910517  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Friday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  May  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  5C  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,075  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Friday May 17, 1991
00138181,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
