ID: 143	RANK: 20	SCORE: 12.328459

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06096106 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06096106 </ACCESS>
<DESCRIPT>  MOVIE; REVIEW; BRIEF  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  Glenn Lovell reviews films on a scale of no stars to 4.; Awakenings.  Penny
Marshall's downbeat, rigorously clinical re-telling of Rip Van Winkle fable.
Robin Williams, at his most mannered, plays nerd neurologist who happens upon
similarities in "sleeping" patients at Brooklyn hospital; Robert De Niro is
patient who undergoes miraculous "Charly" cure. Scrupulously understated but
still manipulative, predictable. PG-13. (star)(star) 1/2  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Weekend  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  FILM MINI-REVIEWS  </HEADLINE>
<TEXT>     Bride of Re-Animator.  More "morbid doodling" by Dr. Herbert West, whose
iridescent-green serum brought army of cadavers back to twitching life in
1985's "Re-Animator." Broader, campier than original, but still lots of fun
gross-outs, such as when five-fingered what's-it escapes from basement lab.
Jeffrey Combs, Bruce Abbott reprise their roles as the Ivy League Frankenstein
and reluctant, love-smitten assistant. Directed by Brian Yuzna; effective
(though hardly original) score by Richard Band. R (nudity, gruesome makeup
effects.) (star)(star)(star);    Class Action.  Gene Hackman, Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio team up as father-daughter San Francisco lawyers arguing opposite
sides of corporate-negligence case. Melodramatic generation-conflict script
comes to thudding halt with preposterous courtroom showdown. Save yourself the
cash: Check out "L.A. Law" on an off night. R (profanity). (star) 1/2;   
Cyrano de Bergerac.  Edmond Rostand's oft-told tale of bravery, balcony deceit
and the nose "that launched a thousand ships" gets glorious, cast-of-thousands
treatment in this robust French adaptation. Gerard Depardieu stars as famed
swordsman, poet and braggart; Anne Brochet, Vincent Perez play Roxane and
Christian, the young lovers. Beautifully designed, choreographed and directed.
PG (violent swordplay). (star)(star)(star)(star);    Dances with Wolves. 
Kevin Costner's sprawling tribute to the vanishing frontier is old-fashioned
epic movie-making at its best. Borrowing from William Wyler and Akira
Kurosawa, Costner has created a rich tapestry of adventures among the Sioux
Indians, circa 1865. Costner plays a by-the-book military man reborn as a
Sioux warrior. Adapted by Michael Blake from his own novel; music by John
Barry. PG-13 (for violence). (star)(star)(star)(star);    The Doors.  Oliver
Stone's frenzied, if simplistic, portrait of rocker Jim Morrison and the band
that defined moody sensuality of the '60s with "Light My Fire," "Riders on the
Storm," etc. Val Kilmer electrifies in later concert re-enactments, but is
less convincing or interesting in scenes which attempt to pinpoint roots of
Morrison's mystic, dark-tinged music. With Meg Ryan and Kathleen Quinlan as
Morrison's biggest fan and craftiest manipulator, respectively. An ambitious
undertaking that comes closer than most rock biopix to capturing spirit of
times. R (profanity, nudity). (star)(star)(star);    The Five Heartbeats. 
Robert Townsend of "Hollywood Shuffle" attempts a screen bio of '60s Motown
group (modeled on Dels and Four Tops) beset by drugs, crooked producers,
clashing egos. Ambitious and touching in spots, with standout work by Michael
Wright as paranoid lead singer, but too melodramatic in execution. R
(profanity). (star)(star);    The Godfather III.  Francis Coppola picks up
story of Michael Corleone (Al Pacino) in late '70s, as family seeks
respectability through Vatican business ventures. Standing in the way are
Sonny Corleone's hot-headed son (Andy Garcia) and old-style Mafioso rivals who
still live by the gun. Beautifully mounted with moody, Oscar-worthy
cinematography, but overall final installment is downbeat, derivative. With
Talia Shire, Diane Keaton, Sophia Coppola. R (violence, profanity).
(star)(star) 1/2;    Green Card.  Sparkling interplay between France's Gerard
Depardieu and Andie MacDowell turn what could have been fluff piece into a
very spirited and surprising comedy-romance. Depardieu plays ne'er-do-well
composer who weds MacDowell to confound immigrations and stay in New York.
Directed, scripted by Australia's Peter Weir. PG-13. (star)(star)(star);   
The Grifters.  Gritty, downbeat Jim Thompson's novel about trio of con artists
who out-con themselves becomes buoyant, sexy film-noir caper in British
director Stephen ("Dangerous Liaisons") Frears' hands. Anjelica Huston (now a
peroxide blonde), John Cusack, Annette Bening star as catty mother, unlucky
son and conspiring girlfriend. Pat Hingle, Henry Jones, J.T. Walsh are among
colorful supporting players. R (nudity, profanity, violence).
(star)(star)(star) 1/2;    Guilty by Suspicion.  Clunky, old-fashioned
melodrama about hot-shot director (Robert De Niro) who's blacklisted for
refusing to "name names" at the McCarthy witch-hunt hearings. Surprisingly
tame, given the incendiary material. Annette Bening, George ("Cheers") Wendt
co-star as De Niro's ex-wife and turncoat friend. Directed, written by Irwin
Winkler. PG-13. (slight profanity). (star) 1/2;    Hamlet.  Franco Zeffirelli,
who popularized the Bard's "Romeo and Juliet" in the '60s, returns with a
robust, albeit severely pared down, version of Shakespeare's most famous
tragedy. Mel Gibson shows new range and depth as a now mostly seething Prince
of Denmark, determined to trap his father's assassins. Glenn Close, Alan
Bates, Paul Scofield, Ian Holm and Helena Bonham-Carter co-star. Handsome
production that stirs the senses without taxing the gray matter. PG (violent
swordplay). (star)(star) 1/2;    The Hard Way.  Neat idea (obnoxious Hollywood
star tails New York cop for "research") is turned into proficient,
occasionally laugh-out-loud-funny comedy thanks to energetic, self-parodic
performances by James Woods and Michael J. Fox and typical whiz-bang direction
by John ("Stakeout") Badham. Alas, central antagonism goes soft and mushy, and
Badham's elaborate "North by Northwest" finale couldn't be more more
belabored. With Stephen Lang as hilariously accessible serial killer. R
(violence, profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Home Alone.  Macaulay Culkin, the
cherubic wiseacre of "Uncle Buck," plays an accidentally abandoned 8-year-old
who protects hearth and home from a pair of bungling burglars on Christmas
eve. PG (slight profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    If Looks Could Kill.  Nifty
espionage comedy starring likable Richard Grieco as high-school ne'er-do-well
who, during summer in Paris, is mistaken for a CIA operative. Linda Hunt,
Roger Rees have fun with the delightfully churlish archenemies intent on (you
got it!) world domination. Surprisingly fun, good-natured OO7 spoof. PG-13
(slight profanity). (star)(star) 1/2;    Iron &amp; Silk.  Mark Salzman plays
himself, a gee-whiz American abroad, in this romanticized flashback to
mainland China on the eve of Tiananmen Square. Pan Quingfu also appears as
himself, a bulldog of a martial-arts teacher. With Jeanette Lin Tsui as
Salzman's guide to the customs and etiquette of China. Corny, picturesque and
quite entertaining. No MPAA rating (OK for family viewing).
(star)(star)(star);    Ju Dou.  Controversial Oscar nominee from China charts
downfall of star-crossed lovers. Li Bao-Tian, Gong Li co-star as laborer and
"aunt" who bear a child every bit as autocratic and unfeeling as the
master/boss they attempt to con. Breathtakingly beautiful in design,
conception, but re-cycled film-noir plot bogs down all too quickly. Directed
by Zhang Yi-Mou. Exclusively San Francisco's Gateway. No MPAA rating (could be
PG-13 for adultery plot). (star)(star)(star);    Kindergarten Cop.  "Twins"
collaborators Ivan Reitman and Arnie Schwarzenegger reteam for a clever
amalgam of cop thriller and kiddie comedy. Arnie plays obsessed cop who goes
undercover as substitute teacher to ferret out (quite literally) the son and
estranged wife of a killer. PG-13 (may be too intense for children under 6).
(star)(star) 1/2;    L.A. Story.  Steve Martin shares his love/hate feelings
for La La Land in this loony, romantic fable that owes more of a debt than
Martin cares to acknowledge to Fellini and Woody Allen. Such obvious targets
as health spas, freeway gridlock, happy-talk news come under assault. Martin,
who also scripted, co-stars with real-life wife Victoria Tennant and an
all-knowing electronic freeway sign. PG-13 (profanity, comic lovemaking).
(star)(star);    The Long Walk Home.  The 1955 bus boycott in Montgomery,
Ala., is dramatized in this excellent character study co-starring Sissy Spacek
and a never-better Whoopi Goldberg as a suburban do-gooder and her quietly
resentful black maid. Both are forced to re-think their priorities when their
families are threatened in different ways. Credit Richard ("Heartland") Pearce
with the strong, understated direction. One of the year's best! PG (for slight
violence). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;    The Nasty Girl.  Every German's
complicity in Nazi war crimes is again scrutinized in this Oscar nominee from
Germany. Michael Verhoeven combines whimsy, romance, dark comedy to show how
his homeland's so-called "Economic Miracle" is built on hypocrisy and lies.
Lena Stolze plays an exuberant Pollyanna whose research for a national essay
contest unearths embarrassing secrets. No MPAA rating (could be PG-13).
(star)(star)(star)(star);    New Jack City.  Mario van Peebles directs the
story of a solitary cop who devotes his life to squashing drug dealers, and a
dealer so powerful he seems unsquashable. The two square off in a ghetto
battle for the hearts, minds and crack-wracked bodies of New Jack City. The
film moves forward with single-minded determination. Van Peebles should have
found more proficient actors for supporting parts (himself included), but
Ice-T has rough grace and Judd Nelson sheds all mannerisms to play a
dead-eyed, dead-ended cop. R (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, sex).
Reviewed by Knight-Ridder Newspapers. (star)(star)(star);    The Neverending
Story II: The Next Chapter.  More action-packed sequel to 1984 kiddie favorite
inspired by Michael Ende book. Bookworm Bastian (now played by Jonathan
Brandis) returns to parallel world of Fantasia to battle evil enchantress and
adult empathy. Falkor the luckdragon and Rock Biter return with a whole new
menagerie of characters. Less pretentious and better designed than its
predecessor. Billed with hilarious new Bugs Bunny-Daffy Duck cartoon, "Box
Office Bunny." PG (OK for family). (star)(star)(star);    The Rescuers Down
Under.  Lightning-paced cliffhanger cartoon from Disney will put you in mind
of Aussie-set "Pinocchio" goosed up for the Indiana Jones generation. Sequel
to '76 hit reteams Bianca and Bernard, mice do-gooders who operate out of a
United Nations for rodents. Eva Gabor, Bob Newhart, John Candy, George C.
Scott supplied the voices. G. (star)(star)(star);    Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern Are Dead.  Tom Stoppard's note-perfect, surprisingly visual
adaptation of his own award-winning play, which proffers worm's-eye view of
doings at Elsinore castle as Hamlet plots death of his father's killers. Gary
Oldman, Tim Roth couldn't be better as the courtier/chumps of title who muddle
on despite suspicion that they don't exist beyond confines of Shakespeare's
narrative. Richard Dreyfuss co-stars as lead Player (aka Fate). Beautifully
designed, photographed. Much superior to Zeffirelli's recent "Hamlet." PG.
(star)(star)(star)(star);    The Silence of the Lambs.  What could have been
ride of the season becomes, under Jonathan Demme's almost polite direction, a
slavish, too-densely plotted adaptation of Thomas Harris novel about a pair of
dangerous sociopaths and the FBI trainee who uses one to track the other.
Jodie Foster is fine as novice agent who must suppress all traces of
femininity to earn respect in a man's profession; Anthony Hopkins, typically,
overdoes it, turning the caged Dr. Lecter into a reptilian wacko. R (violence,
gruesome makeup effects). (star)(star) 1/2;    Shipwrecked.  Crude but
entertaining return to "Treasure Island" territory, compliments of Disney.
Norway's Stian Smestad plays gung-ho youth who becomes more of a Rambo than
Robinson Crusoe when washed ashore on South Seas island; Gabriel Byrne fumes a
lot as pirate stand-in for Long John Silver. Shot in Fiji and Spain. PG.
(star)(star) 1/2;    Sleeping with the Enemy.  Julia ("Pretty Woman") Roberts
returns as abused wife who stages her own death, then takes a new identity in
idyllic Midwestern burg. Patrick Bergin, Kevin Anderson co-star as stalking
husband and new beau, respectively. Source novel took a stab at dealing with
issue of abused wife reassembling her life; movie reduces premise to slasher
cliches. Directed by Joseph ("True Believer") Ruben. R (violence, profanity).
(star)(star);    Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze. 
Those Heroes in the Half-Shells return in broader, funnier sequel to the 1990
hit. Parents will applaud decision to downplay the violence while lamenting
the non-existent plot. With San Jose's Ernie Reyes Jr. as Turtles' new human
ally, David Warner as the all-thumbs professor who deals in toxic waste, and
some fun surprises from Jim Henson's Creature Shop. PG (may be too intense for
some children). (star)(star)  </TEXT>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910405  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Friday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  April  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  5D  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,000  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Friday April 5, 1991
00096106,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
