ID: 143	RANK: 32	SCORE: 10.715387

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06084229 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06084229 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (8), drawing; PHOTO: Andy Garcia, left, and Al Pacino in the nominated
'Godfather III'; PHOTO: Julia Roberts: 'Pretty Woman'; PHOTO: Ray Liotta and
Lorraine Bracco: deadly and dead-on in 'GoodFellas' (color); PHOTO: Kevin
Costner rides the range in 'Dances With Wolves.' But can he lead an Oscar
stampede for his film? (color); PHOTO: Swayze starred in 'Ghost' but Goldberg
may get the gold (color); PHOTO: Kathy Bates emoted in 'Misery' (color);
PHOTO: John Cusack and Annette Bening brought grit to 'Grifters' (color);
PHOTO: Newman and Woodward's 'Bridge' -- too subtle for Oscar? (color); COVER
DRAWING: Jim Hummel -- Mercury News; Popcorn &amp; polemics  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  MOVIE; AWARD; CANDIDATE; NAME; LIST; FORECAST  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  WHOOSH!;    That blast of air you feel from the south is a collective sigh of
relief from the movie community.  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Arts &amp; Books  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  'WOLVES AT THE DOOR'  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  See also related stories on P. 20, 21 and 22 of this section
Additional information attached to the end of this article  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     For a moment there it looked as if President Bush and his cast-of-thousands
Persian Gulf production would upstage Hollywood's "night of nights" -- the
63rd annual Academy Awards gala (to be televised live at 6 p.m. Monday on Chs.
7, 11 and 13).;    Oscar, of course, has weathered previous conflicts -- in
Europe, the South Pacific, Korea and Vietnam. But fireworks overseas have a
way of deflating spirits, raining on the parade, etc. During times of turmoil,
the Academy joins in the war effort and pitches why-we-fight propaganda with
the best of 'em.;    But you can't help sensing industry-wide resentment.
Hollywood is not very good at sharing spotlights or headlines. (Nomination
announcement stories, usually assured of front-page treatment in newspapers
across the country, were down-graded this year as Bush's air bombardment
continued to dominate the news.);    Reflecting post-Vietnam pessimism, Oscar
braced itself for the worst: a long war and rock-bottom Nielsens. Oscar
security, always ridiculously tight, showed signs of rivaling that of Fort
Knox. In mid-February, when the nominations were announced, the Academy warned
of "beefed-up measures," which, for many of us Oscar-night veterans,
translated into visions of sandbags and barbed wire.;    Thankfully, that
scenario didn't come to pass. Instead of war-fatigued viewers, Oscar can look
forward to a large, euphoric crowd of super-patriots. How will this affect the
broadcast and, more important, the Academy membership's choices in the main
categories? You'd be safe in predicting there will be lots of patriotic
tub-thumping from the stage of Los Angeles' Shrine Auditorium and virtually
none of the finger-waving for which Jane Fonda, Sacheen Littlefeather and
especially Vanessa Redgrave (in her pro-Palestinian speech upon winning for
"Julia" in 1977) are infamous.;    The big question Monday night: Will the
Academy, weary of conflict and controversy, be in an especially lighthearted
mood, rewarding such box-office frippery as "Pretty Woman" and "Ghost"? Or
will it take the opportunity to unfurl the flag, jump on the bandwagon and
reaffirm that Oscar is as American as Duke Wayne, Japanese imports and Arsenio
Hall in a tri-colored warm-up suit? The latter scenario is more likely. Which
means "Wolves" -- as in "Dances With Wolves" -- could come crashing through
the auditorium door with big wins in the best picture, best director and best
supporting actor categories.;    For comparison's sake, let's flash back to
March 7, 1946, and the first Oscar derby after Hiroshima and V-J Day. What
kind of mood were Academy members in? Did they embrace tough-minded drama, or
were they higher on comedy and romantic romps? Put differently, did they
wallow in victory or put aside home-front sacrifices (when Oscars were made of
plaster and klieg-light galas were seen as wasteful and harmful to national
security)?;    Answer: Oscar opted for hard-hitting drama over a pair of
family-oriented classics. Samuel Goldwyn and RKO's "The Best Years of Our
Lives," about the difficulties encountered by three soldiers returning to
civilian life, not only won, it won big, taking statuettes for best picture,
best actor (Fredric  March), best supporting actor (Harold Russell), best
director (William Wyler) and best cinematography. Its less dour competition?
Frank Capra's "It's a Wonderful Life" and Clarence Brown's "The Yearling.";   
It would take another four years before the Academy smiled again -- and voted
"All About Eve" (1950) and "An American in Paris" (1951) best picture in their
respective years.;    What sort of mood was Oscar in immediately following the
Korean and Vietnam wars? Hard to say. "The Greatest Show on Earth," an
overproduced Cecil B. DeMille circus epic, won in '52; "One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest" and "Rocky" won in '75 and '76, respectively.;    In recent
years the pendulum has swung between epic, European-flavored biography
("Gandhi," "Amadeus," "Out of Africa," "The Last Emperor") and home-grown
tales of social relevance ("Rain Man," "Driving Miss Daisy," "Terms of
Endearment"). The only film that stands apart in this crop is Oliver Stone's
"Platoon" -- epic in scope, by an American director and something of an
apologia for the downer Vietnam films of the late '70s ("The Deer Hunter,"
"Apocalypse Now").;    Can we discern any trends in all of this? Yes, that the
post-Iraqi war Academy will be in a more sober mood and that, after
back-to-back wins by "Rain Man" and "Driving Miss Daisy," Academy members will
probably heap their favors on another old-fashioned, epic-scale adventure.;   
The winner will be . . . "Dances With Wolves," of course.;    Kevin Costner's
sprawling Wild West opus covers all bases. It's big, pretty and well-crafted;
it's concerned with important issues (the systematic genocide of the Indian
nation, conservation, etc.); it comes with that all-important sense of moral
outrage; and, crucial at this juncture, it's by and about Americans. A vote
for "Dances" at once satisfies our need for self-examination and
self-aggrandizement.;    "Awakenings," with Robert De Niro and Robin Williams,
was too downbeat for Oscar's taste. "Ghost" was too mainstream and popular
(and already is available on tape, thus nullifying the box-office benefits of
a win). "The Godfather Part III" only made it into this category in deference
to Francis Coppola and his past achievements. "GoodFellas," the critics'
darling, is too dark and anarchic for an assemblage that snubbed such classics
as Stanley Kubrick's "A Clockwork Orange" and Sam Peckinpah's "The Wild
Bunch.";    As for the other categories, here's what we predict will happen,
followed by what we would like to see happen. As always, merit will take a
back seat to studio affiliations, block-voting and in-fighting.;    Best
actor;  Once you rule out Costner's wooden soldier boy in "Dances," De Niro's
modern-day Rip van Winkle (he's won twice before), and Richard Harris' extreme
long shot in "The Field," you're left with Gerard Depardieu as Cyrano de
Bergerac in the French epic of the same name and Jeremy Irons as the
insufferable Klaus von Bulow in "Reversal of Fortune." We favor Depardieu, but
no European male in a foreign-language film has ever won in this category.
Oscar will go with Irons, who was scandalously overlooked two years ago for
his work in "Dead Ringers.";    Best actress;  The best that can be said of
this category is that it doesn't include Sally Field or Shirley MacLaine. The
worst: it doesn't have Jessica Lange (for "Men Don't Leave"), Michelle
Pfeiffer ("The Russia House") or Glenn Close ("Reversal of Fortune"). Who'll
take home the brass? Previous supporting-actress winner Anjelica Huston for
her nervous-but-nervy con artist mom in "The Grifters." Kathy Bates, a New
York actress, isn't well enough known and she carries the stigma of a Stephen
King chiller ("Misery"). Julia Roberts of "Pretty Woman" still isn't thought
of as more than box-office insurance; Meryl Streep has won before and handed
in an amiable but hardly noteworthy performance in "Postcards From the Edge."
Our favorite: previous winner Joanne Woodward for "Mr. &amp; Mrs. Bridge."
Unfortunately, her performance as the confused, eager-to-please Kansas City
matriarch is too textured and subtle for Oscar's taste.;    Supporting actor; 
Bruce Davison is the clear-cut favorite for his work in "Longtime Companion,"
but he could be upset by Joe Pesci as the most sadistic Mafioso in Martin
Scorsese's "GoodFellas." Andy Garcia ("Godfather III") and the
much-nominated-but-never-named Al Pacino ("Dick Tracy") don't have a prayer;
Graham Greene, the soft-spoken Sioux shaman in "Dances," could be carried
along by a "Dances" sweep, but his chances seem slim to remote. We'd be
equally pleased by a Davison or Greene win.;    Supporting actress;  A very
mixed field. Whoopi Goldberg, previously nominated for "The Color Purple,"
appears to be Oscar's choice for her reluctant medium in "Ghost." (She was
much better in the ignored "The Long Walk Home," which is only now going into
release.) Diane Ladd, another previous nominee, was selected for her vengeful
nut-case in "Wild at Heart"; Mary McDonnell and Lorraine Bracco drew nods for
"Dances" and "GoodFellas," respectively. Our choice: Bracco, as the naive wife
who undergoes the greatest transformation in "GoodFellas." Her corruption is
at the heart of this Dickensian "Mean Streets.";    Director;  The contest is
between first-time filmmaker Costner and the much-respected Scorsese. Having
favored Costner with a best-picture award, the Academy finally will recognize
Scorsese, who has been nominated twice before and should have won in 1980 with
"Raging Bull." The other nominees: Barbet Schroeder ("Reversal of Fortune"),
Stephen Frears ("The Grifters"), Coppola ("The Godfather Part III").;   
Original screenplay;  There were a lot of decent original scripts last year,
but they didn't make the cut. So whoever wins here won't have much to crow
about. Oscar will go with Barry Levinson's autobiographical "Avalon." His only
competition: Bruce Joel Rubin for the schmaltzy "Ghost." Also nominated: Woody
Allen ("Alice"), Peter Weir ("Green Card"), Whit Stillman ("Metropolitan").
We'll shrug and go with Weir or Stillman.;    Screenplay adaptation;  In
contrast to the previous category, the competition is keen here. Donald E.
Westlake ("The Grifters"), Nicholas Kazan ("Reversal of Fortune"), Nicholas
Pileggi and Scorsese ("GoodFellas"), Steven Zaillian ("Awakenings") and
Michael Blake ("Dances") are all deserving. Oscar will go with Zaillian's
textbook-crisp endeavor; we favor the Pileggi-Scorsese script taken from
Pileggi's book.;    Cinematography;  Another impressive field. Dean Sempler
will win for his brilliant Wild West tableaux in "Dances," though Philippe
Rousselot also looks strong for the otherwise overlooked "Henry &amp; June." Our
choice: Sempler. Other nominees: Allen Daviau ("Avalon") and previous winners
Vittorio Storaro ("Dick Tracy") and Gordon Willis ("The Godfather III").;   
Film editing;  If there's any justice, Thelma Schoonmaker will take this one
in a walk for her bravura work on "GoodFellas." Neil Travis, who cut "Dances,"
looks to be Oscar's favorite, though.;    Original score;  Yes, you're right
-- this category is a scandal. Where are Elmer Bernstein ("The Grifters"),
Jerry Goldsmith ("The Russia House"), Richard Robbins ("Mr. &amp; Mrs. Bridge")
and Ryuichyi Sakamoto ("The Sheltering Sky")? In their place are a bunch of
veteran hacks -- John Williams ("Home Alone"), John Barry ("Dances"), Maurice
Jarre ("Ghost"). Randy Newman's music for "Avalon" is the best of this sorry
lot, but Oscar will go with previous winner Barry.;    Original song;  The
previous awards shows honored Jon Bon Jovi for "Blaze of Glory" (from "Young
Guns II"). Oscar has a chance to set the record straight by naming either
Stephen Sondheim's torchy "Sooner or Later" ("Dick Tracy") or Shel
Silverstein's defiant "I'm Checkin' Out" (warbled by Streep in "Postcards From
the Edge").;    Foreign-language film;  The Academy will make up for not
naming Depardieu best actor by picking France's ambitious "Cyrano de Bergerac"
here. Our choice: Germany's "The Nasty Girl." Also nominated: Switzerland's
little-seen "Journey of Hope," Italy's "Open Doors" and China's "Ju Dou." The
film was the subject of some controversy after China requested it be withdrawn
from competition and the Academy said, "Fat chance." The film's director,
Zhang Yi-Mou, has been forbidden by his government to attend the ceremony.
(box); (hbox) "Awakenings"; (hbox) "Dances With Wolves"; (hbox) "Ghost";
(hbox) "The Godfather Part III"; (hbox) "GoodFellas"; (hbox) Kevin Costner,
"Dances With Wolves"; (hbox) Robert De Niro, "Awakenings"; (hbox) Gerard
Depardieu, "Cyrano de Bergerac"; (hbox) Richard Harris, "The Field"; (hbox)
Jeremy Irons, "Reversal of Fortune"; (hbox) Kathy Bates, "Misery"; (hbox)
Anjelica Huston, "The Grifters"; (hbox) Julia Roberts, "Pretty Woman"; (hbox)
Meryl Streep, "Postcards From the Edge"; (hbox) Joanne Woodward, "Mr. &amp; Mrs.
Bridge"; ACTOR; (hbox) Bruce Davison, "Longtime Companion"; (hbox) Andy
Garcia, "The Godfather Part III"; (hbox) Graham Greene, "Dances With Wolves";
(hbox) Al Pacino, "Dick Tracy"; (hbox) Joe Pesci, "GoodFellas"; ACTRESS;
(hbox) Annette Bening, "The Grifters"; (hbox) Lorraine Bracco, "GoodFellas";
(hbox) Whoopi Goldberg, "Ghost"; (hbox) Diane Ladd, "Wild at Heart"; (hbox)
Mary McDonnell, "Dances With Wolves"; (hbox) Kevin Costner, "Dances With
Wolves"; (hbox) Francis Ford Coppola, "The Godfather Part III"; (hbox) Martin
Scorsese, "GoodFellas"; (hbox) Stephen Frears, "The Grifters"; (hbox) Barbet
Schroeder, "Reversal of Fortune"; SCREENPLAY; (hbox) Woody Allen, "Alice";
(hbox) Barry Levinson, "Avalon"; (hbox) Bruce Joel Rubin, "Ghost"; (hbox)
Peter Weir, "Green Card"; (hbox) Whit Stillman, "Metropolitan"; SCREENPLAY;
(hbox) Steven Zaillian, "Awakenings"; (hbox) Michael Blake, "Dances With
Wolves"; (hbox) Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese, "GoodFellas"; (hbox)
Donald E. Westlake, "The Grifters"; (hbox) Nicholas Kazan, "Reversal of
Fortune"; FILM; (hbox) "Cyrano de Bergerac," France; (hbox) "Journey of Hope,"
Switzerland; (hbox) "Ju Dou," China; (hbox) "The Nasty Girl," Germany; (hbox)
"Open Doors," Italy; DIRECTION; (hbox) "Cyrano de Bergerac"; (hbox) "Dances
With Wolves"; (hbox) "Dick Tracy"; (hbox) "The Godfather Part III"; (hbox)
"Hamlet"; (hbox) "Avalon"; (hbox) "Dances With Wolves"; (hbox) "Dick Tracy";
(hbox) "The Godfather Part III"; (hbox) "Henry &amp; June"; DESIGN; (hbox)
"Avalon"; (hbox) "Cyrano de Bergerac"; (hbox) "Dances With Wolves"; (hbox)
"Dick Tracy"; (hbox) "Hamlet"; FEATURE; (hbox) "American Dream"; (hbox)
"Berkeley in the Sixties"; (hbox) "Building Bombs"; (hbox) "Forever Activists:
Stories From the Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade"; (hbox) "Waldo Salt:
A Screenwriter's Journey"; SHORT; (hbox) "Burning Down Tomorrow"; (hbox)
"Chimps: So Like Us"; (hbox) "Days of Waiting"; (hbox) "Journey Into Life: The
World; of the Unborn"; (hbox) "Rose Kennedy: A Life to Remember"; EDITING;
(hbox) "Dances With Wolves"; (hbox) "Ghost"; (hbox) "The Godfather Part III";
(hbox) "GoodFellas"; (hbox) "The Hunt for Red October"; (hbox) "Cyrano de
Bergerac"; (hbox) "Dick Tracy"; (hbox) "Edward Scissorhands"; -- ORIGINAL
SCORE; (hbox) Randy Newman, "Avalon"; (hbox) John Barry, "Dances With Wolves";
(hbox) Maurice Jarre, "Ghost"; (hbox) David Grusin, "Havana"; (hbox) John
Williams, "Home Alone"; -- ORIGINAL SONG; (hbox) "Blaze of Glory" from "Young
Guns II"; (hbox) "I'm Checkin' Out" from "Postcards From the Edge"; (hbox)
"Promise Me You'll Remember" from "The Godfather Part III"; (hbox) "Somewhere
in My Memory" from "Home Alone"; (hbox) "Sooner or Later (I Always Get My
Man)" from "Dick Tracy"; SHORT SUBJECT; (hbox) "Creature Comforts"; (hbox) "A
Grand Day Out"; (hbox) "Grasshoppers (Cavallette)"; ACTION SHORT FILM; (hbox)
"Bronx Cheers"; (hbox) "Dear Rosie"; (hbox) "The Lunch Date"; (hbox) "Senzeni
Na?" ("What Have We Done?"); (hbox) "12:01 p.m."; (hbox) "Dances With Wolves";
(hbox) "Days of Thunder"; (hbox) "Dick Tracy"; (hbox) "The Hunt for Red
October"; (hbox) "Total Recall"; EFFECTS EDITING; (hbox) "Flatliners"; (hbox)
"The Hunt for Red October"; (hbox) "Total Recall"  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  GLENN LOVELL, Mercury News Film Writer  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910324  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  March  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  18  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  DRAWING; PHOTO  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,503  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday March 24, 1991
00084229,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
