ID: 246	RANK: 17	SCORE: 8.959684
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870331-0109 </DOCNO>
<HL> South Korea Believes
A Flood Is Coming
From Pyongyang
---
And It Could Well Wash Out
The 1988 Seoul Olympics;
North Korea Denies It All
---
By Damon Darlin
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST </IN>
<DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Water-diversion schemes often cause tension between nations. 
But North Korea and South Korea, the Hatfields and the McCoys of the international set, have elevated a dispute over a hydroelectric dam to new levels of histrionics. 

   To hear U.S. ally South Korea tell it, North Korea has mobilized 50,000 soldiers to build a $1.62 billion dam six miles north of the demilitarized zone that separates the two Koreas. 
The Kumgangsan Dam would then be blown up. 
And the explosion would send a 20 billion-ton wall of water down the Han River toward Seoul, the South's biggest concentration of people and factories. 
A slightly different scenario has the North releasing water from a partially filled reservoir behind the partially built dam so as to disrupt the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul. 

   As a countermeasure, South Korea has started collecting public donations for a $700 million "Peace Dam" on its side of the DMZ and about 70 miles upstream from Seoul. 
The southern dam would sit idle, its only purpose being to deflect the flood Seoul says North Korea might let loose. 
The dam is being designed to send the flood back to North Korea. (Five conventional flood-control dams already are in place on the Han between the DMZ and Seoul.) 

   The North confirms that it is building a dam (actually, four dams) but says the South's contention that any such structure has aggressive purposes is a "preposterous lie." 
The biggest dam, according to Pyongyang Radio, would impound only one-eighth the water Seoul claims it would, "and therefore could not possibly threaten the South with flooding." 
On the contrary, the North says, it would help control flooding in the South by reducing the flow of the Han. 
In other words, think of it as a service to South Korea. 

   Seoul officials, says Pyongyang, are "ignobly babbling" about the dam "to divert the disgruntled public attention in South Korea and to bring under control a crisis facing their quaking fascist rule by artificially creating an anti-Communist confrontational commotion." 
Which is quite a mouthful. 

   Of course, the South has good reason to impute malevolent motives to the Northern army's dam-construction activities. 
The two countries technically have remained at war since the 1950-1953 Korean conflict, in which U.S. and United Nations forces aided the South while China sent "volunteers" to fight for the North. 
The unpredictable and rigidly Communist North, which has been ruled by the all-but-deified Kim Il Sung since the war, has engaged in activities that are as threatening as they are bizarre. 

   The North has been caught digging three tunnels under the DMZ, presumably to move troops and equipment. 
North Korean soldiers at the DMZ truce village hacked to death two unarmed U.S. soldiers who had tried to trim a tree in the zone. 
And North Korea is believed to have been behind the 1983 explosion in Rangoon, Burma, that killed 17 visiting South Koreans, including four cabinet officials, and narrowly missed killing South Korean President Chun Doo Hwan. 
Burma convicted two North Korean officers of planting the explosives; Pyongyang denies having taken any part in the bombing. 

   North Korea, which has significantly bolstered its armed forces in the past decade, is a very real military threat. 
With 40,000 U.S. troops in the South, the threat has obvious international meaning beyond the borders of the two Koreas. 
But South Korea has backed away from comments its defense minister made early in the anti-dam campaign last fall that the South would be forced to take "self-defensive measures" -- military as well as economic -- if North Korea continued building the dam. 

   Certain critics of the Seoul government actually see some truth in Pyongyang's accusations that the South is trying to divert attention from anti-government demonstrations by students and others that have flared in recent months. 

   The South's Peace Dam, says Edward J. Baker, the assistant director of Harvard University's Yenching Institute, "is intended to scare the daylights out of the people." 
Adds Selig S. Harrison, an associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace: "The {South Korean} government often uses tension with the North as a reason for domestic suppression. 
There is an increasing feeling among the people that it is overdone. 
Both sides use such absurd propaganda." 

   The campaign to raise $700 million in contributions from the public for the Peace Dam has already collected more than 10% of that sum, remarkable in a country in which annual wages average less than $5,000. 
Everyone from school children to corporate magnates has been inundated with appeals made on television and in newspapers. 

   The government has organized televised rallies. 
Maps and drawings of the potential water devastation -- with a high-water mark one-third the way up the 25-story Daewoo Building and across the top of the National Assembly building -- have been distributed so South Koreans can decide for themselves whether their heads will be above water when the torrent comes down the Han. (South Korean experts say the flood will take 12 to 16 hours to reach Seoul if the North Korean dam is breached, hardly enough time to evacuate a city of eight million people.) 

   Some South Koreans suspect that recent frequent showings of the American movie "Force 10 From Navarone" about Allied commandos who destroy a dam in World War II in order to flood German defenses downstream were part of the government's dam campaign. 
"I think they are trying to tell us something," says an executive of Daewoo Corp., a leading South Korean company. 

   The government says it isn't using the dam issue to divert attention from political dissent at home. 
But Choi Chang Yoon, the vice minister of the Culture and Information Ministry, says a major aim of the dam crusade is to reacquaint South Koreans with the threat from the Communist North. 
He notes that nearly two-thirds of South Korea's population was born after the Korean War ended 33 years ago and that many no longer believe that the North poses a threat. 

   "Their anti-communism is wavering because there is no contact with North Koreans," says a government prosecutor. 
"Their feeling toward North Korea is getting more moderate." 

   There is no way to independently assess whether North Korea's intentions for the dam truly are sinister; intelligence is poor. 
And one doesn't know what to make of the North's public-relations salvos responding to the South's charges. 
Pyongyang even took the unusual step of holding a press conference for foreign reporters and issued a "white paper" dismissing the South's claims. 

   One North Korean assertion does have a certain scary credibility to it. 
North Korea says that blowing up an expensive dam to flood the South would be a waste of good explosives. 
To do the job would take a blast equivalent to a nuclear bomb. 
Better to drop it directly on Seoul. 
That would be "a hundred times better in destructive effect," says Li Choong-Sung, the vice chairman of the North Korean power commission. 

   Pyongyang maintains that its new dam is designed to generate electricity and prevent flooding, and in the latter respect it would be an incidental boon to South Korea. 
Pyongyang says the dam will be only 400 feet high and will impound only 2.6 billion tons of water, not the 20 billion tons that Seoul says would be held behind a 650-foot-high dam, which is nearly as high as the Hoover Dam on the Arizona-Nevada border. 
The total capacity of all four North Korean dams being built in the area would be just 4.7 billion tons, Pyongyang contends. 
The North hasn't replied to a South Korean offer to provide enough electricity to replace what would be produced by the new dam if only Pyongyang would cancel the project. 

   The South says its own Peace Dam will be 726 feet high and will take eight or nine years to complete, which means that it would be finished several years earlier than the North Korean dam, whose reservoir could take five years just to fill with water. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
