ID: 246	RANK: 49	SCORE: 8.098998
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881003-0198 </DOCNO>
<HL> Europe: Danube Dams Threaten Hungarian Reforms </HL>
<AUTHOR> Peter Keresztes </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> EUROP </CO>
<IN> ENV </IN>
<TEXT>
   Now that Mikhail Gorbachev has seized the full reins of power in the Soviet Union he'll presumably press on with making the Soviet economy more like that of Hungary. 
So it would be timely to take a look at the furor going on behind the Iron Curtain over the Czechoslovak-Hungarian hydroelectric project being built on the Danube -- which has entangled Austria in an embarrassing mess. 

   The great Danube dams have emerged as a white elephant, characteristic of Stalinist central planning -- monstrously expensive, of dubious utility, ruinous to the environment and contrary to popular will. 
Yet the Hungarian government of Karoly Grosz is having difficulty making the adjustment that a rational, market-oriented approach would require. 
The authorities in Budapest are denying that the system is a waste, as an energy shortage is possible in the 1990s. 
Mr. Grosz is complaining bitterly that the regime's opponents are blowing the project into "a political issue." 
The dams on the Danube, in any event, have become one of the issues splitting the Hungarian party and endangering the Grosz regime. 

   Widespread opposition in Hungary began to mount as details of the plans -- launched secretively 17 years ago -- dribbled into public view and as site-preparation began last fall on Hungary's dam at Nagymaros. 
The Czechoslovak work on its Gabcikovo portion, glasnost watchers will note, raised no strenuous opposition and is nearing completion. 
In Budapest, though, mass demonstrations, biting articles in the state-monitored press, selectively aired opposition in the Academy of Sciences, and criticism from political figures are pressuring the Grosz regime to reconsider the project. 

   The dam controversy spilled over into Austria, where the Greens forced the abandonment in 1985 of a nearly complete dam at Hainburg, near the Hungarian and Czechoslovak border. 
Vienna then struck a deal to buy electricity from the Hungarian part of the project, which the Austrians' participation made possible. 
Austria's critics accuse it of exploiting the nondemocratic conditions in Hungary and to export there its environmental problems and construction overcapacity. 
Financing has been guaranteed by the Austrian government on a contract to deliver to Austria over 20 years most of the Hungarian share of the project's electricity output, augmented by power from other sources such as Hungary's Paks nuclear plant, which is enlarged. 

   The Austrian opponents, including some "green" conservatives in the People's Party, have questioned in Parliament the morality of Austria's participation. 
Some support canceling the credit guarantees. 
The Austrian chancellor, Franz Vranitzky, has stated that Nagymaros was "purely a Hungarian decision" and that Austrian construction companies involved are bound by their contractual obligations. 

   The project is in a flat region engineers agree is ill-suited for hydroelectric power. 
The system requires altering 120 miles of the Danube, damming it for a drop of 70 feet at Gabcikovo and 27 feet at Nagymaros and rerouting 97.5% of the water flow over 20 miles. 
The system is said to be a serious threat to, among other things, the drinking water for three million people, farmlands and forests. 

   Benefits meanwhile will be negligible. 
The plants would, beginning in the year 2015 when deliveries to Austria end, supply only 2% to 3% of Hungary's power requirements. 
Equivalent investment in modernizing the country's antiquated energy-guzzling industry, critics point out, would not only save at least as much power but would enhance productivity. 
Associated benefits -- navigation, flood control, a linkup to an international power grid and the use of the Nagymaros dam as a highway bridge -- are either marginal or could have been achieved by other means much more cheaply and effectively. 

   The project's actual costs, let alone huge associated expenses for things like environmental-protection, and waste and water treatment, have not been disclosed, though Mr. Grosz has conceded that "now, we would not launch the project because the money is needed in other areas." 
Indeed, resources are being diverted to the barrage. 
Badly needed sewerage and water treatment facilities in two major cities, Miskolc and Debrecen, for example, have been postponed. 

   The government is claiming that the restoration and contract-penalty costs of abandoning Nagymaros would exceed the expense of completion. 
Abandonment would cost $1 billion in hard currency, argue the rulers of Hungary, which already owes $18 billion to non-socialist lenders. 
The government says the construction will cost the equivalent of $1 billion. 
Austrian financing for a third of the originally estimated construction costs obligates Hungary to pay principal and interest with 11 billion Austrian schillings worth of electricity beginning in 1996. (At current exchange rates, that's worth $830 million.) 

   The construction cost projection was made four years ago and assumed a 5% to 6% annual inflation rate. 
This year prices in Hungary are climbing by more than 17% and, according to Hungary's most authoritative economic weekly, HVG, will likely remain in the double-digit range for the next two years. 
Recent unofficial figures in Budapest newspapers put the cost of the construction alone at $1.25 billion, while estimates from the West go much higher. 

   Government promises to protect the environment are no easier to accept than its cost estimate. 
It agreed years ago to go along with scientists' recommendation to install a system to monitor water quality. 
To establish monitoring constants, scientists say, the devices should be in place five years before the system starts up. 
Completion is less than three years away, yet there is still no monitoring system. 

   Budapest is pushing ahead with work toward making the project irreversible -- the lining of the riverbed with concrete -- while attempting to seem reasonable and democratic by having ordered up expert opinions on the costs and legal implications of abandonment and by preparing to justify its decision before Parliament at the fall session, starting Wednesday. 

   To appease public opinion Budapest has begun to lobby with Czechoslovakia, the worst industrial polluter in the upper Danube, to complete treatment facilities before the start-up. 
Budapest may even agree to a ban on a peak-shedding operation, though Czechoslovakia, which gets half of the power from the complex, may not without big penalties. 
Peak-shedding would involve stopping the river flow for lengthy periods -- which is said to have the most detrimental of all the project's environmental effects -- to fill the upriver Gabcikovo reservoir and then release large amounts of water when electricity demand peaks. 

   Thus it seems that it's where rhetoric collides with costly projects involving bricks and mud that perestroika and glasnost meet their toughest test. 
Mr. Grosz has called completion of the project a question of "prestige." 
But the credibility of would-be economic reformists depends in large part on eliminating white elephants of the sort conceived by the Stalinists. 
A market system would already have written off the Danube dams. 

   ---
   Mr. Keresztes is deputy editorial page editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
