ID: 282	RANK: 79	SCORE: 11.628025

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06175130 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06175130 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (4); Photography by Tom Van Dyke; PHOTO: RIGHT, there are hairy things
to pet at the Insect Zoo, including the Mexican red-legged tarantula held by
Lisa Stephens. The San Francisco Zoo's annual Night Tour for members comes up
in July. (color); PHOTO: BELOW, Stephanie Lopez, in middle, laughs as she
loses a bit of whipped cream from Paul Clifton's sundae at Mel's Drive-In.
(color); PHOTO: BELOW RIGHT, Arturo Echauri of the Ghirardelli Chocolate
Manufactory will concoct a sundae to satisfy all ages. (color); INDEX PHOTO:
TOM VAN DYKE; The seasons go round and round, the painted ponies go up and
down, and kids become parent-allergic. But there are places for families with
teen-agers and younger naysayers, like the carousel at Golden Gate Park.  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  FAMILY; JUVENILE; ENTERTAINMENT; SAN-FRANCISCO; GUIDELINE  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  MAYBE YOU CAN'T EXPECT TEEN-AGERS to leap at the opportunity to go on a family
outing. But you can get them to go. As you can with younger kids who may kick
and scream but finally admit that, hey, maybe that was fun.;    My son is away
at college, so the issue rarely arises with him anymore. My daughter, 12, is
interested if it doesn't conflict with a party, if she can take a friend, and
if it's something she enjoys so much that she is able to overlook the fact
that we are doing it as a family.  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  West  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  FOUND WEEKENDS
TO LURE TEEN-AGERS ON A FAMILY OUTING, YOU
HAVE TO KNOW HOW TO BAIT THE HOOK  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  CAROLE TERWILLIGER MEYERS is the author of San Francisco Family Fun and
Weekend Adventures for City-Weary People: Overnight Trips in Northern
California.
See also related article on page 8 of this section.  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     So these suggestions have been battle-tested. Our hook is San Francisco,
baited with great food in many cases. The beauty of living close enough to San
Francisco to visit for just a day is that you can return home feeling like
you've been far away but you don't have to pay for a hotel or a plane ticket.
And for dessert: After a long day in the city, everyone is sure to be tired
when you get home. Maybe the kids will even go to bed before you do.; WHERE TO
GO WITH TEEN-AGERS; WHO DON'T WANT TO BE SEEN; WITH THEIR PARENTS;    What
more could they possibly ask for? The lights are out (nobody can see them with
you), the music is loud (and you can't tell them to turn it down), and you
can't bring along their younger siblings (no kids under 6 permitted).;   
"Live under the stars of Northern California's largest indoor universe," the
evening Laserium at the California Academy of Science's Morrison Planetarium
in Golden Gate Park seems the perfect outing with teens. Dazzling visuals, 3-D
and graphic animation bounce on the planetarium ceiling, matching movement
with the beat of hard rock.;    The current shows include the tremendously
popular Pink Floyd: The Wall, U2, and Rocket, featuring Rush, Boston, Pink
Floyd and Monty Python.;    Too bad, though, for those of you who don't like
rock. The classical music programs once offered here are now a thing of the
past. But good news for those of you who are not fond of rap: It is not one of
the choices.; WHERE TO GO WITH YOUR KIDS; WHEN YOU DON'T WANT TO BE SEEN; WITH
THEM;    The intriguing, well-maintained Far East Cafe in Chinatown looks now
much as it did when it opened in 1920. What makes it a favorite with me is the
30 spacious private wooden booths that have curtains for a door. These
wonderful enclosures provide the ultimate in privacy and have been especially
handy at times when my children's behavior was unpredictable.;    I remember
one Christmas season when we had strolled around Union Square window-shopping
and then had wandered down Grant Avenue and through the Chinatown gate. We
wound up here with two very tired, very cranky kids. Tucked away where no one
could see or, one hopes, hear us, we enjoyed a tasty family-style Cantonese
dinner and avoided the dreaded glares of hostile adult diners.;    We eased
our hunger with bland winter melon soup, an appetizer of crispy deep-fried
prawns and sweet barbecued spareribs, excellent sweet and sour pork, snow pea
beef, barbecued pork chow mein, tea, and fortune cookies.;    During bouts of
sibling rivalry we distracted the kids by offering the chance to press the
booth's old-fashioned buzzer to summon the waiter. They would press and press
and nothing much would happen, but eventually the waiter would appear. (I've
been told by the management that these buzzers actually work, but I remain
unconvinced. The kids, however, didn't question it. Now they would. Now they
question everything.);    If all else fails, this restaurant allows you to
threaten to order, and then actually deliver, shark's fin, bird's nest, or
seaweed soup.; WHERE TO STUFF YOUR OWN TEDDY BEAR; Bears of all kinds -- from
your basic brown to your quite elaborate creamy-colored Beary Godmother with
pink satin wings and a magic wand -- are available in the tiny Basic Brown
Bear Factory &amp; Store. The bears are not sold anywhere else, so they make a
perfect souvenir of a visit to San Francisco.;    The close-to-wholesale
prices range from $2 for a mouse to $145 for a 4-foot-tall, fully jointed bear
with leather paws. There are many more in between.;    If you call ahead for
an appointment, you can stuff your own specialty bear using their World War
II-era machine that once pumped up life preservers. A generic baby bear ($8)
is always available for stuffing.;    I'm fairly certain that the promise of a
visit to pick out a special bear in this special shop would excite most people
of any age.; WHERE TO STUFF YOURSELF;    The extensive menu at glossy yet
comfortable Max's Opera Cafe offers fare to please any stage, or age, of
hunger. There are huge New York-style deli sandwiches, served with an
assortment of mustards and a choice of either house-made coleslaw -- made
interesting with the tang of horseradish -- or potato salad.;    Dinner
entrees include fresh fish, steaks and hamburgers.;    But the items that get
most kids (and grown-up kids) excited, causing them to eat more than they
really should, are the desserts. Bigtime desserts -- creamy cheesecakes, a
devilish chocolate Niagara Falls cake with vanilla buttercream frosting . . .
even design-your-own sundaes made with toppings imported from the Big Apple.; 
  And if you dine between 7 and 11 p.m., you get the bonus of being
entertained by talented servers who sing everything from Broadway to Bach.;   
Should you have a child who remains unimpressed and hungry, note that a
McDonald's is just across the street.; WHERE TO IMPRESS SOPHISTICATED;
PARISIAN EXCHANGE STUDENTS;    Our exchange student from Paris told us that
his city had no Hard Rock Cafe and that he had waited in line at the London
branch but never got in (hint, hint). So we made sure he got in at the San
Francisco branch.;    While waiting to be seated, we all checked out the
bizarre decorations on the walls: half of a Cadillac convertible, Elvis'
rhinestone cape, Harrison Ford's Indiana Jones jacket, to name but a few. And
we all enjoyed the ear-splitting rock 'n' roll.;    Franck enjoyed the
classics of American cuisine -- a hamburger, fries, devil's food cake --
almost as much as he enjoyed checking out the attractive girls, several of
whom turned out to be French. He was, however, surprised and upset to discover
that he couldn't be served a beer. In France, he was legal at 19.;    Before
leaving, our impressed French student did purchase the de rigueur souvenir
logo sweat shirt.; WHERE TO TAKE A CHOCOHOLIC; FOR AN ECSTATIC OVERDOSE;   
The popular shopping mall known as Ghirardelli Square was built in 1900 as a
chocolate factory. The Ghirardelli Chocolate Manufactory ice cream parlor
remains a reminder of that original function. A small working chocolate
factory still operates in the back.;    Completely remodeled this spring, the
ice cream parlor now promises visitors more efficient service and more
seating.;    Ice cream concoctions include such local extravaganzas as the
Alcatraz Rock (a rocky road and vanilla ice cream island set in a bay of
whipped cream and armored with a shell of Ghirardelli chocolate, nut rocks and
a cherry) and the Emperor Norton (two scoops of vanilla ice cream in hot fudge
sauce with bananas, whipped cream, nuts and cherries). Simpler sodas and
milkshakes are also available.;    All chocolate used in sauces and ice creams
is Ghirardelli's own. Dreyer's makes all the ice creams; flavors using any
Ghirardelli chocolate are available only here.;    After indulging, you can
take that chocoholic to the parlor's candy counter and select from the
complete line of Ghirardelli goodies -- one of which is a 5-pound milk
chocolate bar selling for $29.95.; WHERE TO EXPERIENCE A SAFE QUAKE;    If you
have somehow managed to miss one of our famous temblors, if you want to
re-experience the excitement and not the danger, or if you just want to knock
the socks off out-of-towners, a visit to the SafeQuake at the California
Academy of Sciences should take care of matters.;    This exhibit recreates
the infamous '06 quake using a shake table that simulates the ground motion of
an earthquake. Viewers standing on the special platform feel the increasing
intensity of a quake as they watch a narrated video simulation. This exhibit
takes participants up to only a 5.6 on the Richter scale. Going beyond that,
to the 7.1 of '89 or the 8.6 estimated for the '06 quake, is considered to be
unsafe.; WHERE TO STEP BACK INTO THE '50S; AND IMPRESS YOUR KIDS; WITH HOW
COOL YOU USED TO BE;    Mel's Drive-In used to be a real drive-in. The carhops
would came out to the cars with trays so that you could actually eat in your
car. Now you can drive in off one of the city's busiest streets, which is
convenient, but the eating goes on in the restaurant.;    Blown-up
black-and-white photos of the "old days" decorate the walls, and give you
plenty of opportunity to tell your kids about how you used to hang out on
Saturday nights at drive-ins. Updated computerized mini-jukeboxes are within
reach of most seats, allowing you to select an oldie for a quarter. (Jukeboxes
were invented in San Francisco in 1888.);    My youngest thinks Mel's is cool.
My oldest liked Mel's so much when he was a teen that he actually requested
return visits.;    Though prices are a bit high for fast food, this food isn't
really all that fast, and it is pretty good. The Famous Melburger, made with
one-third pound of ground chuck, is served on a sesame bun with all the
trimmings. The onion rings are crisp. Flavored colas (remember cherry,
chocolate, vanilla, and lemon?) are available, as are old-fashioned thick milk
shakes -- made with Carnation deluxe ice cream and served with the extra in
the mixer tin.;    Items on the kids' menu are served in boxes designed to
resemble '50s cars. My daughter remains impressed that she can order scrambled
eggs at dinner time. Mel's serves breakfast all day long.; WHERE TO TAKE YOUR
KIDS FOR DESSERT; WHEN THEY HAVEN'T FINISHED; THEIR VEGGIES;    At Polly Ann
Ice Cream you can select from a constantly changing choice of over 425 flavors
of ice cream. Fifty-two flavors are available every day.;    Some of the
flavors are seasonal and some are trendy -- Batman (black vanilla with lemon
swirl) and E.T. (dark green vanilla with Reese's Pieces) are currently the top
sellers. Among the many unusual flavors are Bumpy Freeway (rocky road with
colored marshmallows), sunflower seed, cantaloupe, chocolate peanut butter,
and American Beauty (made with real rose petals). Traditional flavors are also
available.;    But, Mom and Dad, what you really want to know about is Polly
Ann's vegetable ice cream! If your kids haven't eaten all of their vegetables
for dinner but you still want to go out for an ice cream, treat them to a
cone. Carrot cake and corn are also sometimes available. "Anything is
possible," says Mei Wu, the owner. (Note that vegetable flavor is usually, but
not always, available. Call ahead.);    If you do take your kids for such a
noble dessert, don't blow it by letting them have it dipped in chocolate
topping.;    You might also want to know that Polly Ann claims to be the only
ice cream store in the world where you can take your dog for a free ice cream
cone. Babies are given a free cone, too.; WHERE TO WOW YOUR UNDER 12s;   
After all this heavy eating, we need someplace to work off those calories.
Children's Playground in Golden Gate Park, constructed in 1887, was the first
playground in a U.S. public park. Today it is filled with modern creative play
structures.;    Even as my daughter speeds toward teenhood, she still exudes
enthusiasm when we take her here.;    Next door, an antique Herschel-Spillman
carousel makes its rounds within a protective hippodrome enclosure. Built in
1914, it has 62 beautifully painted hand-carved animals and still operates its
original Gebruder band organ.; WHERE TO PET A TARANTULA . . .; AND FIND OUT
WHAT ZOO ANIMALS DO; AFTER DARK;    The Insect Zoo in the Children's Zoo at
the San Francisco Zoo is one of only four such zoos in the United States. (The
others are in Cincinnati, Tucson, and Washington, D.C.) It is populated with
6- to 8-inch-long giant walking sticks, giant Costa Rican wood cockroaches,
and honeybees complete with a functioning hive. Sometimes one of the several
varieties of hairy tarantulas are brought out for petting. The favorite for
this activity is Petunia, a Mexican red-legged tarantula.;    You can learn
even more unusual things about the zoo if you become a member of the
Zoological Society. Membership qualifies you to attend the annual Night Tour
at the Zoo, scheduled this year for July 11, 12 and 19. Entertainment,
demonstrations, behind-the-scenes tours and admission are all free to members,
and a picnic dinner will be available for a small charge. You can feed the
giraffes, get close to the bears, and see where the elephants sleep.;    This
remains one of my own family's favorite events. You just wouldn't believe how
wild the zoo gets after dark. Even older kids like it because it's hard for
them to be recognized in the dark. Besides, they'll be having too much fun to
care. Maybe.  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  Carole Terwilliger Meyers  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910623  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  June  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  6  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  PHOTO  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,424  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday June 23, 1991
00175130,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
