ID: 94	RANK: 43	SCORE: 4.962646
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881102-0122 </DOCNO>
<HL> Is Contact Tracing an Answer to AIDS? </HL>
<AUTHOR> Phyllis Gapen </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   In California, a controversial ballot measure that is ahead in the polls would, among other things, mandate tracing of all partners of people infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. 
A group of 800 doctors and two county medical societies are in favor of Proposition 102; the California Medical Association and the director of the state health department are opposed. 

   In New York, 1,800 surgeons and obstetricians are suing colleagues at the state health department. 
They want health officials to declare AIDS a sexually transmitted communicable disease and locate and counsel people testing positive for HIV and their sexual and IV-drug partners. 

   Such battles in the nation's two largest states attest to how tracing the contacts of those with the AIDS-associated virus has become a cutting issue in public policy related to the disease. 
Such tracing already is under way in some areas of the U.S., and the record is mixed. 

   Nowhere in the country is there mandatory listing of sexual or IV-drug partners. 
Both New York and California currently require the reporting to health authorities only of full-blown AIDS cases, not the often-symptom-free infection with the HIV virus. 
A growing number of states, however, require the names of people with HIV infections to be reported to health officers, a precursor to contact tracing. 

   Formulating a uniform method of tracing those exposed to the virus would be no easy task, concedes Franklyn Judson of the Colorado Department of Health, one of the architects of that state's successful voluntary HIV testing, counseling and tracing program. 
The incidence of infection varies from state to state, as does the pattern of spread among high-risk groups. 

   The New York surgeons and obstetricians argue that the lives of innocent people could be spared with intensive voluntary contact tracing, by alerting possible carriers not to spread it further, but health department officials are skeptical. 

   Of New York City's more than 16,000 reported full-blown AIDS cases, 33% are concentrated among IV drug users, who often don't know the names of their contacts and do not behave in the most responsible way. 
Male homosexuals (with 50% of New York City's AIDS cases) also often are unable to supply the names of their contacts. 

   When the names of partners are volunteered, New York health officers place highest priority on tracing exposed women who could become pregnant. 

   To date, San Francisco, where nearly 5,500 people have come down with the full-blown disease, has formally attempted, with the infected person's permission, to reach the partners of 210 people who were exposed to the virus. 
All these contacts were heterosexuals. 
The goal of this effort is to prevent HIV infection among the unborn -- a priority shared by health officers in Los Angeles and San Diego. 

   Last month, the California Department of Health Services for the first time issued guidelines for assisting HIV-infected people who ask for help in tracing persons they exposed to the virus. 
Mark Hughes, of the state's AIDS office, said one of the primary reasons for the new rules was to assist people who wish to be treated with AZT. 
"With wider acceptance of the drug, the philosophy of testing is changing; more people are being tested so they can avail themselves of the drug." 

   Beginning in January, even without Proposition 102, California doctors will be allowed to inform other medical personnel, as well as sexual and needle-sharing partners, about HIV exposure, without revealing the source of that exposure. 

   Proposition 102 goes further. 
It requires doctors to report to health authorities the names of all people infected, or reasonably suspected of being infected, with HIV; mandates that those infected provide lists of their sexual and IV-drug partners, and requires health officers to locate and counsel those partners; permits employers or insurers to use HIV tests; and lets doctors test a patient's blood without his consent. 

   In South Carolina, currently only 34 people a month are testing positive for HIV. There, according to early results published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, this June, state officials were able to track down more than 70% of the contacts named by the 12 men who by last fall had tested positive for the virus. 
The South Carolina program continues. 

   As early as 1985, public-health officials in Colorado began tracing the contacts of people named as HIV-infected, a voluntary process referred to as "partner notification." 
In Denver, says state health director Thomas Vernon, medical sleuths soon discovered the virus was being spread in a "core group" of some 350 homosexual men and IV drug abusers. 

   At a cost of $200 to find the contacts of each infected person, health experts located 500 sexual and IV drug partners. 
About one in 20 contacts tested positive for HIV. 
In the absence of a cure, counseling HIV-positive people to abstain from sexual relations or the sharing of needles could reduce the spread of the disease, and expenditures for notification could translate into savings. 
For every new case of AIDS averted, Coloradans could expect to avoid at least $60,000 in medical costs. 

   Dr. Vernon says he got the names of the contacts by allowing some men at HIV test sites to use pseudonyms for themselves if they also gave a correct address or telephone number. 
Health officials also have promised not to reveal the name of the infected person who triggered the notification process, and legislation protects the information obtained from HIV patients from court disclosure, according to Denver health lawyer Ed Richards. 

   Because many contacts cannot be found, Colorado health officers concluded over time that it was not reasonable to attempt to notify over 20,000 people exposed to HIV by 4,000 residents. 
Dr. Vernon has narrowed his search for contacts. 

   "A partner notification program must set priorities according to a number of criteria," Dr. Vernon said, including how recently a person contracted the virus and the risks an infected person presents to those who don't know about the infection. 
"An individual with a series of bathhouse experiences three years ago is a low priority," he explained, because it is doubtful his contacts can now be found. 
"We can't afford to have field workers finding" these people, because "the benefit-to-cost ratio is very unfavorable." 

   Most of the male partners of gay men, adds his colleague Dr. Judson, shouldn't have to be notified, because they know the risk and should seek HIV tests. 
The female sex partners of infected men -- usually the wives of bisexuals -- are the first that health officers notify. 

   The president's AIDS commission last summer also recommended targeted tracing for groups at high risk of unwittingly contracting the disease. 

   "Absurd" is the word Colorado's Dr. Vernon used to describe California's proposed identification program for every infected person in the state. 

   Laurens P. White, a San Francisco internist who speaks for more than half the practicing physicians in his state in his capacity as president of the California Medical Association, says: "It always seems like I'm a gay apologist who says you can't take a chance on the gay person losing privacy or insurance. 
I'd lose it like a shot if you could control the disease" through contact tracing. 
"If you could toss the civil liberties {of patients} out the window and control the disease with contact tracing, I'd toss them out the window. 
But not only is AIDS not controlled {by the process}, a lot of people can be injured by it." 

   But Warren Bostick, who formerly was a medical school dean and president of the California Medical Association, thinks his physician colleagues put undue emphasis on the rights of people with HIV. According to the pathologist, who helped draft Proposition 102, the way society now ensures confidentiality for an HIV infected person is tantamount to putting a "gun in his hands." 
We are "obliged to insist upon certain restrictions of individual rights," he asserts. 
Dr. Bostick says he intends for public health officers to use their own discretion in choosing the HIV carriers to trace. 
"If that's what they meant, that's what their law should have said," Dr. White contends. 

   Experience in public health clinics suggests there are both benefits and risks to reporting to health officials the names of those with the virus. 

   In South Carolina, doctors at the state health department concede that testing among homosexual males dropped nearly 20% at an urban clinic in the first few months after physicians and clinics were required to report the names of people testing HIV positive. 
But they add that demand for tests rose again quickly. 

   More than twice the number of male homosexuals took HIV tests when Oregon eased its requirement for reporting the names of those with HIV, allowing patients the option of being tested anonymously by public health clinics. (Shortly thereafter, the state began voluntary contact tracing. 
A few dozen people have had their contacts traced so far.) 

   Oregon's experience, argue gay activists in California, suggests that naming HIV carriers will drive people underground and thwart efforts to halt the spread of the disease. 
But Colorado's voluntary HIV reporting and contact-tracing experiences seemingly stand as a challenge to such charges. 
The record shows that homosexuals at high risk of contracting HIV continued to seek tests and cooperate with efforts to find those they had exposed to the virus when AIDS was declared a sexually transmitted disease. 

   But both Benjamin Schatz, an attorney for the National Gay Rights Advocates, and Dr. White maintain that in San Francisco, Proposition 102's contact tracing proposal will be "a waste of up to $1.75 billion in resources." 
Education about "safe sex" has brought the rate of new HIV infection in San Francisco to almost zero, they assert. 

   According to Colorado's Dr. Judson, however, "It's still possible most of the determinants of 'safe sex' behavior in gay men have nothing to do with counseling. 
We have to be cautious in assuming any one thing we do is serving as the major stimulus for change." 

   Colorado's success in contact tracing may have more to do with its laws than with its health policy. 
Unlike such states as South Carolina and Oregon, Colorado has no anti-sodomy laws. 
Dr. Judson says gay men have no fear that if their names end up on a state list of HIV carriers, they will be jailed for illegal sex acts. 

   Colorado's experience may simply be an example of the intersection of law and medicine, but there isn't a doctor in the country who can tell you for sure. 

   ---
   Ms. Gapen is a free-lance medical writer based in Houston. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
