ID: 267	RANK: 71	SCORE: 22.028896
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871023-0003 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Critique:
Joseph Brodsky: Russian Poet Laureate
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 10/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   From the beginning, almost as soon as he began his career as an underground poet in his native Russia, Joseph Brodsky was hailed as a major talent. 
When he was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1972, W.H. Auden welcomed him to the West in Austria, sponsored him like a son. 
Yesterday, a U.S. citizen for a decade, Mr. Brodsky won the Nobel Prize for literature. 
It was one of those rare occasions when nobody was likely to yowl at the Swedish Academy's choice. 

   In this country, Mr. Brodsky, at 47, is an admired member of the literary community. 
"Yesterday, even the New York Post was claiming him as a Greenwich Village Poet." 
In the U.S.S.R., where poetry is at the center of popular culture, he is reliably said to be a major figure still, despite official disapproval. 
And that cloud was about to blow away, even before the prize. 
Novy Mir, a leading literary publication, had requested permission to publish some of Mr. Brodsky's work, and, he says, he granted permission. 
He also says he is ready to accept an invitation to visit the Soviet Union if one is offered. 

   Whether that invitation does arrive will surely be a test of "glasnost." 
At the very least, it will be instructive to see what the Soviets now have to say about their long-shunned, gifted child. 

   Although he was an instinctive dissident and hated the omnipresent pictures of Lenin he saw as a child, Mr. Brodsky is not at all such a political animal as Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the last Russian writer to win the Nobel Prize. 
That was in 1970, and by then Mr. Brodsky had, like Mr. Solzhenitsyn, served time in a labor camp, for parasitism (he had no job except as an unofficial writer and his Jewish heritage encouraged reflexive Russian anti-Semitism). 
But he and the author of "The Gulag Archipelago" are worlds apart. 
Mr. Solzhenitsyn made a career out of tirelessly documenting the abuses of the Soviet regime against its people. 
He wrote long, heavy, chilling indictments. 
Mr. Brodsky's mostly short, often intricate poetry is not obviously useful as propaganda against the U.S.S.R. 
His explicitly anti-Soviet essays appeared after his banishment. 
His main sin against Soviet orthodoxy seems to have been his militant individuality, his lack of allegiance to any creed except the tradition of Russian poetry. 
Perhaps the cultural commissars were also offended by his sensuality, his irony. 

   No doubt the august Swedes got a whiff yesterday of the Brodsky that drove the Soviets mad. 
He was sitting in a Chinese restaurant in London with John Le Carre when he got the news of the prize. 
He called it "a big step for me and small for mankind." 
What would he do with the $340,000 in prize money? 
Spend it. 

   But he also said something that should please Soviet leaders if they mean what they say these days about loosening up restrictions on publishing and about letting people buy books they want to read. 
Mr. Brodsky raised a glass and said he hoped more people would read Russian poetry, "because it is in terrific shape." 
He was talking not about his own work but about all the poetry now being written in the Russian language. 

   This loyalty to the mother tongue and its practitioners is not a cloak put on for show by a newly minted celebrity hoping to please. 
Just after he entered the West, he wrote: 

   Listen, my boon brethren and my enemies! 

   What I've done, I've done not for fame or memories 

   in this era of radio waves and cinemas,
   but for the sake of my native tongue and letters. 

   For which sort of devotion, of a zealous bent 

   ("Heal thyself, doctor," as the saying went),
   denied a chalice at the feast of the fatherland, 

   now I stand in a strange place.
   The name hardly matters. 

   It's windy, dank, dark. 
And it's windy. 

   Hence midnight flings branches and leaves onto fence and roof tiles. 

   Now I can state with confidence: here I'll live out my days, losing graduually hair, teeth, consonants, 

   verbs, and suffixes, with this hat of mine ladling the
ocean surface,
   as with Prince Igor's helmet, just to reduce its size, 

   munching raw fish, behaving naturally.
   Aging! 
The time of success. 
Of Acknowledging truth. 

   Of its sullied linen. 

   Of banishment. 

   Of discouraging pain. 

   As for the latter, I neither nourish it nor dismiss it. 

   If it gets hard, annoying,
   I'll yell out: self-restraint is just dumb and morbid. 

   As for now, I can take a bit more of it. 

   If an ember still glows inside this monolith, 

   it's not reason, just blood that keeps circling, going.
   This song isn't the desperate howl of deep distress. 

   It's the species' trip back to the wilderness. 

   It's, more aptly, the first cry of speechlessness, 

   whose domain could be thought just a total feat of sounds
voiced by a once scarlet and wet --  now hardening into a
moribund more or less matter -- strong vocal vent.
   Change for the better. 
Or that's my view of it. 

   (translated by Alan Myers with the author. 
From "1972," from "A Part of Speech" by Joseph Brodsky. 
English translation. 
Copyright 1980 by Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux Inc. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus, &amp; Giroux Inc. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
