ID: 267	RANK: 79	SCORE: 21.679909
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871022-0008 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
MIT Economist Solow Wins Nobel Prize
---
By David Wessel
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN>
<DATELINE> CAMBRIDGE, Mass.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Robert M. Solow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, and promptly used his newfound prominence to warn that painful times lie ahead. 

   Taxes must rise, he said. 
Government spending must be cut. 
The dollar must drop. 
U.S. workers must expect their pay to fall behind workers in Japan, West Germany, Sweden and Switzerland. 

   "These are painful things," Mr. Solow said. 
"They may be especially painful in a country like the U.S., whose whole image of itself is that things are always getting better." 

   But the 63-year-old economist said the stock market crash doesn't presage another Great Depression. 
"It is not 1929," he said. 
"The public policies of the last 50 years have made a difference in the resilience of the economy." 

   He added, however, that increasing taxes without provoking a recession requires delicacy on the part of Washington policy makers. 
"The Fed is going to (have to) strike the bargain with Congress that Paul Volcker wanted all along: As taxes are raised and expenditures are reduced, we will use monetary policy to offset the contraction," he said. 

   Mr. Solow won the prize for his explanations of what makes industrialized economies grow. 
In a pioneering essay published 30 years ago, he argued that technology, broadly defined, is a more important determinant of a country's economic growth than the amount of capital. 
In short, it's not only how much wealth a country has, but how well it uses that wealth to increase the level of technology that matters. 
"Silicon Valley is an example of the sort of thing I'm talking about," he said. 

   Assar Lindbeck, a professor who sits on the committee of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences that chose Mr. Solow, told the Associated Press in Stockholm: "The increased interest of government to expand education and research and development was inspired by these studies. 
Every long-term report I have seen for any country has used a Solow-type analysis." 

   Mr. Solow urged that as the U.S. tightens its belt, it ought to reduce consumption, and not reduce investment in plant and equipment, research or education. 
"It would be a mistake to leave the unskilled, the uneducated, just hanging there," he said. 

   The awarding of the Nobel Prize to a Keynesian economist and a former adviser to the Kennedy and Johnson administrations comes at a time when more conservative economists and monetarists have the president's ear. 
Mr. Solow is a harsh critic of President Reagan's economic policy. 
"The best thing you can say about Reaganomics is that it happened in a fit of inattention," he quipped. 
Mr. Solow also offers a sharp contrast to James Buchanan, a conservative economist who won the Nobel Prize in economics last year for his work on political decision-making. 

   Mr. Solow is known for his enthusiasm for baseball and sailing and for his sense of humor. 
"He is one of the few economists in the world that can write good English -- English that's fun to read even on technical subjects," said James Tobin of Yale University, who won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1981. 

   In one recent essay titled "How Economic Ideas Turn to Mush," Mr. Solow said that economics is maddeningly difficult to explain to the public. 
"The attention span of the people you write for," he told a crowded news conference, "is shorter than the length of one true sentence." 

   Two years ago, he needled fellow economists for "an apparently irresistible urge to push their science further than it will go, to answer questions more delicate than our limited understanding of a complicated economy will allow . . . . 
Nobody likes to say, 'I don't know.'" 

   But yesterday, Mr. Solow did just that when confronted with the inevitable questions about the stock market. 
After hearing about the Nobel Prize, Mr. Solow's son, an economist himself, advised his father: "Don't say anything stupid about the stock market." 
And, Mr. Solow told reporters, "You wouldn't want me to let my son John down." 

   Sitting with a glass of champagne in his hand in a classroom at MIT's Sloan School of Management, Mr. Solow suggested that the crash may yield something good -- if it reduces the flow of bright business-school students to investment banks. 
"It may make engineers out of some yuppies," he said. 
"Sweet are the uses of adversity." 

   A Brooklyn-born, Harvard-trained economist who has been at MIT since 1950, Mr. Solow described himself as "a frugal economist." 
His assets are invested almost entirely in a house on Martha's Vineyard, an apartment on Boston's waterfront and a 24-foot sailboat. 
He said he would spend some of his $340,000 in prize money on a new sail and perhaps a new outboard motor -- and then would seek investment advice. 

   Mr. Solow is the third MIT economist to win the Nobel Prize. 
The others are Mr. Solow's long-time collaborator, Paul Samuelson, and Franco Modigliani. 
Of the 25 economists who have won or shared the prize since it was first awarded in 1969, 15 have been Americans. 

   An MIT biologist, Susumu Tonegawa, won the 1987 Nobel Prize for medicine earlier this month for his work on the human immune system. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
