ID: 235	RANK: 17	SCORE: 23.747536
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861218-0161 </DOCNO>
<HL> Many Adults Are
In Barbie's Corner
As She Fights Jem
---
They Adore 27-Year-Old Doll
And Her Many Costumes;
The Barbie Hall of Fame
---
By Carrie Dolan
Special to The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/18/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> HAS MAT </IN>
<TEXT>
   Barbie fetishism among adults is on the rise. 

   Each year, more women and men attend a Barbie convention, where they sell and swap Barbie hatboxes, Barbie barbecue sets and Barbie McDonald's uniforms. 
A Barbie newsletter has nearly 3,000 subscribers. 
And in Palo Alto, Calif., Evelyn Burkhalter regularly conducts tours of her Barbie Hall of Fame. 

   "People are seeing that this is no longer a doll but a representation of our history," Ms. Burkhalter says. 
Adds Peggy Bowling, an Oklahoma City fan, "A lot of women see in Barbie what they would like to be." 

   All this moral support comes at a crucial period for 27-year-old Barbie. 
The Mattel Inc. star is facing serious competition from Jem and the Holograms, a flashy doll rock band made by Hasbro Inc. Jem's creators say she has the social conscience and executive abilities that Barbie lacks. 

   To battle this upstart, Barbie, a woman of many identities and even more costumes, has formed her own rock band, the Rockers. 
In the persona of Rocker Barbie, she is belting out new-wave music and wearing metallic clothes. 
Ken, her longtime beau, isn't a member of the band, touching off speculation that Barbie has dumped him for Derek, the band's hip guitar player. 

   Jem made her debut in February and now ranks No. 16 on the Toy Hit Parade, a monthly list of the industry's top sellers. 
Barbie, who didn't even make the Top 10 last December, rebounded this year to No. 2, trailing Hasbro's long-marching G.I. Joe and edging out Tonka Corp.'s Pound Puppies. 

   Still, Jem is an increasing threat. 
"This is the first time I can ever remember a doll who's climbed up so quickly on the charts," says Thomas X. Murn, the executive editor of Toy &amp; Hobby World magazine, which publishes them. 

   Stephen Schwartz, Hasbro's senior vice president of marketing, offers an explanation for Jem's appeal. 
"Jem is a woman with a purpose. 
She's an executive," he says. 
"Barbie likes to shop. 
Barbie has no personality." 

   Hasbro is full of details about Jem's life: By day, she runs a music company, donating profits to a home for runaway girls. 
By night, with the help of battery-powered magic earrings, she turns into a rock star, dressed in a "shimmering pink lame ensemble" and backed up by the hot female trio of Shana, Kimber and Aja. 
Her boyfriend, Rio, who works as the stage manager, "provides the casual/chic image of TV's 'Miami Vice.'" 

   Jem -- and this is fact now, not fantasy -- has a cartoon show, with her own animated rock videos. 
"Kids are a lot more sophisticated today," a Hasbro spokeswoman says. 
Market research, she says, has found that children five years old and up closely follow rock videos on cable TV and are "absolutely fashion-conscious." 

   In retaliation, Mattel had planned to announce tomorrow the winner of a nationwide search for its first flesh-and-blood Barbie, a real live Rocker Barbie. 
About 500 aspiring rockers, including a seven-year-old tap dancer and a 70-year-old from Illinois, responded to ads seeking "beautiful Barbie look-alikes." 
An album, a concert tour and speaking engagements were planned. 
Alas, the company said yesterday that while the search will continue, none of the contestants so far had the true "Barbie essence." 

   Nevertheless, Rocker Barbie sales are expected to total about $75 million this holiday season, making Barbie Mattel's biggest seller. 
Mattel says Rocker Barbie was the perfect persona to bring the doll to life. 
Last year, she was a computer-literate businesswoman. 
"It was good for Barbie but pretty unexciting," says Candace Irving, a Mattel spokeswoman. 

   Ms. Irving says Barbie is "less flamboyant than Jem," and while it isn't "in her makeup to be tied to any particular cause," Barbie "would be socially responsible, if pressed." 
Ms. Irving, incidentally, denies rumors of romantic friction since Barbie's rock career took off. 
"People acted like it was as big as the Chernobyl meltdown when they thought Barbie dumped Ken," she says, but she insists that "Barbie and Derek are just good friends." 

   Hard-core Barbie fans dismiss Jem as a fad. 
"She's ugly," says Ruth Cronk of New York, the president of the International Barbie Doll Collectors Club. 
"No matter what they come out with, it won't beat Barbie. 
Even Brooke Shields couldn't make a dent." 
Mrs. Cronk's club has grown from 29 members to 3,000 in the past decade. 

   Members get a newsletter, which features patterns for Barbie clothes ("you can make Barbie look like everything from Bo-Peep to pregnant," Mrs. Cronk says), a study of Barbie's family tree and an article about Barbie's pets. 

   Fans enjoy the camaraderie. 
"I thought I was the only person past the age of 13 who appreciated Barbie," says Sibyl DeWein, of Clarksville, Tenn. 
After hooking up with other Barbie fanatics, she says, "I found out I wasn't as smart as I thought I was. 
Until 1972 I didn't even know there was a Spanish-speaking Ken." 

   Mrs. DeWein, who co-wrote a 305-page Barbie encyclopedia, says, "There's no real way to explain the Barbie mystique." 
But Prof. Robin Lakoff, a board member of the women's-studies department at the University of California at Berkeley, ventures an explanation. 

   "You have to look at the reasons why people consider Barbie a desirable feminine image," Prof. Lakoff says, "and that's a rather dangerous thing." 
Barbie, she says, implies that "the role of an ideal woman is essentially to look pretty; she encourages the superficial, the idea that clothing is all." 
The Barbie image, says the professor, is "the airhead who consumes." 

   Prof. Lakoff, who never had a Barbie, suggests a reason for adult women's attraction to the doll. 
"People like to hang on to the security of childhood," she says. 
"As a child, {Barbie} gave them an image of what it was to be a woman. 
When they grow up, they realize it's a lot harder." 

   The next Barbie convention, in June, has the theme "In Oklahoma, Every Day is Christmas with Barbie." 
Mrs. Bowling of Oklahoma City, who is the coordinator, is keeping plans secret, but past conventions included workshops on how to wash Barbie's hair and how to care for Barbie's clothes (ironing isn't recommended). 

   Mrs. Bowling says an increasing number of men attend Barbie conventions. 
One male hairdresser recently wrote of his "all-consuming passion" for Barbie in the Barbie newsletter. 
Michael McDonnell, who has concentrated on Ken collecting since 1971, also says more men are becoming interested in the dolls. 
Mr. McDonnell, an Internal Revenue Service worker from California, has searched for a particular Ken briefcase for 16 years. 
"I can't express how difficult it is to find these things," he says. 
"But I love the thrill of the hunt." 

   Good will usually flourishes among groupies, but Mrs. Bowling admits, "There are power struggles. 
A few people like to think they are the Barbie authority." 

   Mrs. Bowling, who once made herself five exact woman-sized copies of Barbie outfits (it took four months to hand-paint the fabric of one of them), says attention to detail is crucial in collecting Barbie memorabilia. 
"There are some real elusive accessories," she says. 
"There's a thermos with a lid that comes off, and Ken's pants even had a real zipper an inch long." 

   The search for such treasures evidently requires concentration. 
"You have to keep your mind functioning on it daily," Mrs. Bowling says. 
"If you don't study on a regular basis, you forget what you need." 

   The Barbie Hall of Fame, in the back of Mrs. Burkhalter's doll shop in Palo Alto, is the perfect place to study. 
Over 14,000 items sit in glass cases. 
There are black Barbies, Hispanic Barbies, Ken-A-Go-Go, who comes with wigs, and Growing Up Skipper, who races through puberty when her arms are raised. (Skipper is Barbie's younger sister.) 

   Mrs. Burkhalter dismisses a large-lipped Kissing Barbie, calling it as "homely as sin" (which is just as well, since no puckering partner was ever made). 
Also on display are a Barbie-sized Vic Damone album, a pink Barbie commode, and Barbies dressed as Marilyn Monroe, Phyllis Diller and Pat Nixon. 

   A highlight is an original 1959 Barbie, wearing a zebra bathing suit, cat-eye sunglasses and hoop earrings. 
The Hall of Fame doesn't sell its treasures, but there is a market for such items. 
First-run 1959 brunettes, in "mint, in-the-box" condition, go for up to $1,750. 

   Blondes, they say, are slightly cheaper. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
