ID: 235	RANK: 49	SCORE: 18.993967
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870727-0040 </DOCNO>
<HL> Toy Industry Faces a Lackluster Year
---
Absence of Runaway
Hits Is a Major Factor
---
By Jospeh Pereira
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> WOWI HAS CLO MAT KPT </IN>
<TEXT>
   For the past nine months, G.I. Joe and Barbie doll have been sitting in the one and two slots, respectively, on the bestseller chart for toys. 

   To the toy industry that isn't very good news. 

   It means that runaway hits like Cabbage Patch and Trivial Pursuit, each of which jingled the cash register at more than $500 million a year, are notably absent. 
By comparison, G.I. Joe, projected to bring in $185 million this year, is small potatoes. 

   Last year, without any new hits, the toy industry had lackluster sales. 
And analysts, taking a peek up the road, don't see any blockbuster candidates this year. 
As a result, they are scaling down their estimates of toy sales for 1987. 

   At the start of the year, analysts were projecting a 5% to 7% increases in sales from 1986. 
Thomas Kully, an analyst with William Blair &amp; Co. of Chicago, was among them. 
"Now I'm thinking zero to less than 5% would be more realistic," he said. 

   The second half of the year "is bound to pick up but I don't think it will be enough to save the year," Harold Vogel, a Merrill Lynch Capital Markets analyst, said. 

   Lately, toy makers have been posting disappointing second-quarter earnings. 
In Pawtucket, R.I., Hasbro Inc., the nation's largest toy manufacturer, last week reported a 44% drop in profit on an 11% decline in revenue. 
In Hartford, Conn., Coleco Industries Inc., which sells Cabbage Patch dolls, edged into the black after three quarters in the red, but its second-quarter profit fell 29%. 
And in Fremont, Calif., high-flying Worlds of Wonder Inc. scaled back a planned financing after watching its stock tumble and posting a sharp drop in profit for the quarter ended March 30. 

   The No. 2 toy producer, Mattel Inc. of Hawthorne, Calif., will issue its second-quarter results in mid-August. 
"Don't expect its numbers to be impressive," Mr. Kully said. 
"They'll be at about break-even point." 

   Part of the blame for the current famine is the plenty of the past. 

   Since 1982, the toy industry has been helped by blockbusters such as Pacman, Masters of the Universe and Transformers that caused industrywide sales to multiply sharply. 

   To expect the industry to keep up that pace is unrealistic, said Harry Wells, an analyst at Adams Harkness &amp; Hill in Boston. 
Between 1977 and 1984, annual spending on toys climbed from $65 per child to $168 per child, according to Find/SVP, a New York research group. 
"In those days the industry was like a baseball team with a batting average of .900," Mr. Wells said. 
"Now it's playing .600 ball," he added. 

   "I don't think it's fair to judge things by Cabbage Patch," said Norman Ricken, president of Toys "R" Us Inc. of Rochelle Park, N.J., the nation's largest toy retailer. 

   Mr. Ricken isn't writing off 1987 yet. 
"There are some good products out there. 
Some of them have been late in getting to retailers, like Captain Power (a toy activated by a television set) and Heather Doll, both by Mattel. 
They ought to do well," he added. 

   Others aren't so optimistic. 
Last February, toy manufacturers previewed some of the new products for retailers at a trade show in New York. 
"I didn't really see any excitement on the faces of people as in years past," said Rick Anguilla, editor of Toy &amp; Hobby, a trade publication. 

   In the next few months, Hasbro will introduce Visionary plastic figures portraying characters from a distant planet and Air Raiders dolls and flying objects that operate on air pressure. 

   But Robert Hubbell, Hasbro's vice president, investor relations, isn't predicting another Cabbage Patch phenomenon. 
"Comparing this to the game of baseball, I think Visionaries and Air Raiders will be singles where Cabbage Patch or Trivial Pursuit are home runs. 
But I feel we're still fielding a solid team of steady hitters," he said. 
Using the same analogy, the company's Pogo Bal, third on the Toy &amp; Hobby best-seller chart, is a double, Mr. Hubbell said. 
The company expects Pogo Bal to produce $35 million in sales this year, less than a fifth the sales of its top product, G.I. Joe. 

   Some toys were thought to have potential to become hits this year, but none captured the imagination of the consumer for any length of time. 

   Lazer Tag, Worlds of Wonder's long-nosed pistol that fires infra-red rays, triggered a national craze only for a few weeks. 
Selling for $80 to $130 each, with batteries that had to be replaced often, the game faded in popularity. 
The shooting of a Lazer Tag player in California by a police officer who mistook the youth for an armed prowler didn't help. 

   Hasbro's rock star Jem just couldn't stand up to competition from Mattel's Barbie with its 28-year tradition. 
And talking toys, put out by several companies, didn't climb very high on the charts. 
"Parents couldn't justify paying $70 for something that would hold the interest of their kids for half a week," Mr. Anguilla said. 

   Some toy makers have tried to create new toys based on characters on TV shows, such as "Masters of the Universe." 
The strategy was to use the shows as a promotion tool. 
But their efforts met with limited success. 
"People in the industry thought all you had to do was throw a toy out there with a lot of advertising and an animated show and chances are it was going to succeed. 
Now there is a glut of animated shows," he said. 

   The absence of a blockbuster isn't from lack of trying. 
The fact is no one knows the secret. 
"If I did, I wouldn't be doing what I do," said Hasbro's Mr. Hubbell, suggesting that if he knew what makes a hit toy, he would be in business for himself. 

   "I don't think you're going to get a Cabbage Patch more than once a decade. 
I don't know why, but it doesn't happen," Mr. Kully said. 

   ---
   Top Ten Best-Selling Toys
   1.
G.I. Joe (Hasbro Inc.) 

   2.
Barbie (Mattel Inc.) 

   3.
Pogo Bal (Hasbro Inc.) 

   4.
Silver Hawks (Kenner Parker Toys Inc.) 

   5.
Alf (Coleco Industries Inc.) 

   6.
Transformers (Hasbro Inc.) 

   7.
Real Ghostbusters (Kenner Parker Toys Inc.) 

   8.
Cabbage Patch Kids (Coleco Industries Inc.) 

   9.
Lady LoveLocks (Mattel Inc.) 

   10.
My Little Pony (Hasbro Inc.) 

   Source: Toy &amp; Hobby World
</TEXT>
</DOC>
