ID: 235	RANK: 59	SCORE: 18.243862
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861224-0169 </DOCNO>
<HL> Boys and Girls Each Have Their Own Toys
(And Firms Still Pitch Them That Way)
---
By Jolie Solomon
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/24/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AGREA KPT HAS OAT
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Susan Lehr, a Cincinnati homemaker, was happy to buy her three-year-old son a doll this year for Christmas. 
"But if he starts asking me for Barbie when he's eight," she says, "I'll worry." 

   If current trends are any guide, Mrs. Lehr will have no need to fret. 
American families may be inching toward a time when boys and girls play with the same toys, but the toy industry isn't pushing it. 

   The "liberating" of that industry seems at most to mirror the halting changes in the lives of the adults buying the toys. 
Judging by the sales of items like Kenner-Parker Toys Inc.'s Easy-Bake Oven, for example, small boys, like their fathers, take their first step toward housework by way of the kitchen. 

   But for every little girl exulting over a Lego construction set Christmas morning, there will be many more unwrapping bridal dresses and tutus for My Little Pony, Hasbro Inc.'s pastel plastic horse. 
Dolls that wet, for girls, and laser guns, for boys, are still the natural order in the toy store. 

   The toy industry says that's the way kids and their parents want it. 
"Research shows that girls still prefer the cute and frilly. 
And when boys perceive a product as a girl's toy, they won't have anything to do with it," says Toni Langkau, a publicist who works on toy accounts at Daniel J. Edelman Inc. in New York. 
"You have to have boy-driven products and girl-driven products." 

   Even retailers who cater to parents with progressive ideas about toys say they see ambivalence. 
"Shoppers come in and say, 'I want something for a two-year old girl,'" says Susan Lounsbury, president of Play Fair in Boulder, Colo. 
"At that age, we think, what difference does it make?" 

   For many people, it makes an enormous difference." 
An awful lot of men who wouldn't consider themselves sexist don't want their boys to have dolls," says Greg Larson, president of Larson's Toys &amp; Games in Palm Beach, Fla., and Columbus and Cincinnati, Ohio. 
"We get grandmothers who buy their grandsons dolls; then the fathers come in and return them." 

   Argues David S. Leibowitz, a toy analyst with American Securities Corp. in New York: "It has nothing to do with manufacturers. 
Toys are not sold, toys are bought. 
If the peer group wants the product," he says, it will sell. 

   But Mr. Larson, among others, says the toy industry is the source of strong messages maintaining the great divide. 
"The toy industry is still really sexist," he says. 
"Every year we go to the toy fair, and we come back saying, 'It's not getting any better.'" 

   For example, although Hasbro, the biggest toy maker, also markets board games and other "gender-neutral" items, it organizes its biggest sellers strictly along sex-role lines. 
Its wholesale catalog features a Girls Toys line that includes Real Baby and Get in Shape, Girl! exercise kits. 
The Boys Toys line includes Transformers and Inhumanoids -- small, hard-plastic characters that in a dollhouse might be considered dolls but in an imaginary war zone are known as "action figures." 

   The distinction is meaningful. 
G.I. Joe got a big boost a few years ago when Hasbro retired the old, softer, Barbie-sized Joe and brought him back as a small, hard "action figure." 

   Toy companies trumpet the message in fantasy adventure programs and tied-in advertising on Saturday morning television -- when most peer groups do their own "research." 
Commercials for boys' toys are brash and lively, with bracing music, while spots for girls' toys have a soft, filmy look, pastel tones and music that Jodi Levin, a Toy Manufacturers Association spokeswoman, describes as "perky." 

   Toys meant to mirror real life are also distinguished by gender. 
Photos of Little Tikes' Push About Mower, for example, feature a little boy at work; photos for Push About Vacuum feature a girl. 

   And such distinctions start early. 
The package for Ambi Toys' Baby's First Phone displays an infant in pink, while Baby's First Car shows a child in blue. 
The package for Tomy's Stunt Pilot, for ages three to seven, depicts only part of a child, but a bit of blue collar can be seen. 

   Even where a product would seem to be free of any sex-role association, most companies stick to the color line. 
Fisher-Price this year is selling watches for children only in pink or blue. 
"Why couldn't they have brought it out in yellow or red?" asks Ms. Lounsbury of Play Fair. 

   A spokeswoman at Fisher-Price, a division of Quaker Oats Co., says: "After kids start going to day care or nursery school and watching television, they start asking for gender-specific toys." 
She adds that next year Fisher-Price will include colors that are "hot." 
Kids ages four to nine are "fashion-conscious" as well as gender-conscious, she says. 

   Among the exceptions to the gender line are construction products like Lego System Inc.'s Lego or Habermaas' T.C. Timber, which has a package showing a girl in a frilly dress surveying a toy construction site. 
And many toys for older kids suggest clearly that they are for either sex. 
The marketers at Discovery World balance pictures of boys and girls on the packages for their magnet, microscope and other science kits. 

   Recently, some companies have introduced toys in a "crossover" category -- marketed to make clear that a male with a doll in his arms is still, as one company put it, a "rough-and-tumble" boy. 
American Greetings Corp. produces such sugar-and-spice items as Strawberry Shortcake. 
This year its AmToy division brought out the "first plush action figure" for boys. 

   This toy, says AmToys, is supposed to give boys what girls get from dolls: "a refuge from stress, a means of expressing feelings they can't put into words, an acceptable outlet for aggression." 

   But, says Ms. Langkau, the publicist, while the smallest boys will use a teddy bear for such purposes, "by four or five, they're too macho for that. 
They don't want their friends to see them." 

   AmToys' answer is My Pet Monster, a 24-inch, blue-fur creature with yellow fangs, warts on his nose and a set of handcuffs. 
Televison ads show little boys racing around on their bikes with the Monster or dangling him in front of suitably horrified little girls. 

   Hasbro has gone as far as to introduce a cuddly human doll for boys. 
Kids with My Buddy can even get garments for the doll, although they run mostly to baseball uniforms and workout clothes. 
"There's nothing sissy about him," contends Toy Manufacturers' Ms. Levin. 
"But he's basically a rag doll." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
