ID: 235	RANK: 78	SCORE: 16.808376
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871021-0020 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letter from India:
Irate Phone Users Find Some Solace,
But Leggy Barbie Has No Such Luck
---
By Sudeep Chakravarti
Special to The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST MAT
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
AIRLINES (AIR) </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW DELHI  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Chandralekha Aggarwal is so frustrated that she can barely express herself. 
The thin housewife gesticulates wildly. 
Around her sit five mournful, official-looking men, who occasionally interrupt with a soothing "no problem." 
Mrs. Aggarwal looks dubious. 

   As would anyone whose telephone hasn't worked properly for eight years. 
The men consoling her are senior officers of Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd., New Delhi's laid-back phone company. 
Mrs. Aggarwal and protagonists crossed lines in August at a "telephone court," in which telephone users in the capital were invited to state their cases against the company. 
It was Mahanagar's first such "trial." 

   More than 400 subscribers jammed into an austerely appointed auditorium, each with tales of extraordinary woe. 
They were met by high-ranking company officials, including the general manager. 
Sixty cases were resolved that day -- an event newsworthy enough to make headlines in New Delhi newspapers the next day. 

   State-run Mahanagar, like the other public phone companies in India, has obsolete technology, overstretched facilities and generally appalling service. 
Last year, the company made headlines when a former cabinet minister appeared at one of its exchanges, brandishing a pistol and demanding a long-delayed phone call to Bombay. 

   Other subscribers have been more patient. 

   Says the aggrieved Mrs. Aggarwal: "I make a complaint. 
The phone works for a few hours. 
Then goes dead." 
Even more frustrating, she complains, is the perfect performance of her neighbor's telephone. 
The officials nod sympathetically, as if to suggest that perhaps something can be done about the neighbor's phone. 

   Businessman Harjap Singh Nagi waves a thick folder of complaints. 
He says the phone company billed him for two calls to London, where he doesn't have any business associates or family. 
To cap that achievement, he says, the calls were billed for a day on which his telephone officially wasn't working. 

   The "telephone court" was a success for the 60 cases that were resolved. 
Brigadier R.I.N. Luthra, a retired army officer, impressed the telephone company with his military mien -- and a 60-day telephone bill that lists 900 erroneous calls. 
"But why do we have to wait for the court to handle the case?" he asks. 
"Isn't it a waste of public money and time if these can't be settled at lower levels and quickly?" 

   Success will elude most. 
Mahanagar says that it receives thousands of complaints a month. 
But it plans to hold court only four times a year. 

   ---
   Pity poor Barbie in India. 
She has no sari, and Ken has disappeared. 

   But India loves the little doll just as she is: blonde, blue-eyed and leggy, if a bit plastic. 
A quarter century after she first charmed the hearts of little girls in the U.S., Barbie has been selling like chapatis this summer in New Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta. 

   This Barbie is a precise copy of her American incarnation, right down to the design of her miniskirts, her lounger and end table set, her diary and her "antique telephone" -- which should come in particularly handy in India. 

   At 236 rupees ($18), a Barbie and her lounge furniture cost the equivalent of an average Indian's monthly income -- restricting the market to the middle and upper classes, about 10% of the estimated 800 million population. 

   "Our research showed that nobody wanted an Indian-looking Barbie," says A.K. Gupta, a regional manager with Blow Plast Ltd., which makes the dolls in collaboration with Mattel Inc. of the U.S. Mr. Gupta says Indian consumers don't want the adaptions popular in other markets, where Barbie gets an Afro, a duskier shade or a tiny kimono. 
They don't want her cooking plastic curry in an Indian-style townhouse. 
They don't want a caste mark on her forehead. 

   But the Indian market does have its peculiar demands. 
And that is leading to some lonely nights in the bubble bath for Barbie. 
Specifically, there's no place for a Ken doll in this market. 

   "Definitely not," says Mr. Gupta. 
"The concept of a boyfriend may be too advanced for India," where premarital relationships are frowned upon and many couples don't meet until their wedding day. 

   A quick survey of New Delhi toy shops shows the company might be making a blunder. 
Clerks say children are inquiring about Barbie's family. 
Many have heard that she has a beau back home. 

   Mr. Gupta concedes that a compromise might be on the way to the production line: "Perhaps a brother," he says. 
"But we really have to think about it." 

   ---
   The friendly skies of Indian Airlines, the government-owned domestic airline, may have become a bit too friendly. 

   For most Indians, the carrier's reputation revolves around high ticket prices, crowded flights and in-flight attention that is, to passengers at least, blase. 

   But all of India was titillated in August when India's minister for civil aviation told Parliament that the airline's stewardesses had a reputation for romantic attachments to the men in the cockpit. 

   The minister, Jagdish Tytler, said that from now on, when philandering pilots are winging their way north to Leh, their paramours will be on a plane headed south to Tiruchirapalli. 

   "Duties shouldn't be compromised," says A.K. Sivanandan, the airline's public-relations manager. 
He parries questions on how far the affairs have gone. 
"I'm not saying they do any act," Mr. Sivanandan says. 
"But they may play around. 
You can close your eyes, but for how long?" 

   By separating in-flight couples, Indian Airlines says it is safeguarding the marriages of staff members. 
If a pilot has a relationship, "he may neglect his house," says Mr. Sivanandan. 
"How do you think his wife and family will feel?" 
Such affairs have broken up "some" families, but he says the company doesn't keep figures on how many crew members are currently enjoying extra-marital bliss. 

   According to Indian Airlines rules, a person can have "only one wife existing at one time," says Mr. Sivanandan. 
He says that translates to one relationship. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
