ID: 235	RANK: 89	SCORE: 16.142275
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880610-0125 </DOCNO>
<HL> Double Standard For Kids' TV Ads --- Non-Network Stations' Lax Rules Lure Toy Makers -- and Rile Critics </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joanne Lipman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> MKT TEL </IN>
<TEXT>
   In one Barbie doll commercial, America's favorite 30-year-old teen-ager looks just about the same as she always has. 
A bundle of plastic arms and legs, she's incapable of doing much of anything without the help of the little girls holding her. 

   But look at this second commercial. 
Set up on a strobe-lighted stage, Barbie and her buddies appear to move all by themselves, holding guitars and dancing up a storm amid flashing blue and pink lights. 
Clouds of smoke swirl about them, and a rock 'n' roll score is intercut with the shrieks of little girls. 
It takes a second viewing, and the pause button of a videocassette recorder, to notice the blacksleeved arms in the black background manipulating the dolls. 

   Why the difference? 
The first spot ran on network television, where standards for children's advertising are strict. 
The second ran on non-network TV, where there are often no such standards at all. 
And therein lie the seeds of a growing debate. 

   Critics say the disparity is an open invitation to abuse in children's advertising. 
And while no firm statistics exist, they contend that the problem is getting worse. 
A major reason: Proliferating independent and cable stations, they note, are drawing more advertisers -- and child viewers -- away from the networks. 
Indeed, with competition in the toy industry intense, many advertisers are feeling the lure of non-network TV's freer atmosphere. 

   While the networks require such things as a realistic portrayal of a toy's abilities, Playmates Toys Inc. was able to use special effects in a non-network spot to make its talking Cricket doll dance, spin and gesture as well. 
The ad included the disclaimer "Doll does not walk" flashed on the screen -- but that didn't stop Pilar Boehm, 5, from promptly asking her mother to buy her one. 
"I said, 'Can't you see it doesn't walk?'" 
Helen Boehm recalls. 
"But my daughter can't read." 

   Ms. Boehm is the director of the Children's Advertising Review Unit (CARU) of the Council of Better Business Bureaus. 
Of the more than 60 kid's TV commercials cited by the agency over the past five years, she says, all but two were non-network ads. 
The Cricket commercial, which CARU cited as being misleading, is typical of the group's targets. 

   In another case, a series of independent-TV ads for Sylvanian Families, a line of small animal figures made by Coleco Industries Inc./Tomy Corp., used stop-action animation to make the figures walk, jump and pick up furniture. 
CARU cited the spots as being confusing to kids. 
A spot for Voltron, a 26-inch-high, remote-controlled robot made by LJN Toys Ltd., showed the toy battling cartoon villains and zapping two of them with a laser, when the real thing basically just moved forward and backward. 
CARU questioned whether the ad exaggerated the toy's capabilities. 

   CARU, as a self-regulatory group, has its own suggested guidelines for kid's ads but wields no legal authority to change or pull them. 
Most advertisers abide by its suggestions, though. 
Coleco, for example, says it "agreed there was potential for confusion" and modified the spot in February by making a "clean break" between the fantasy and real-life segments. 
Playmates, which says it doesn't think its ad was misleading, and LJN, which didn't respond to calls for comment, have taken the commercials in question off the air. 

   "Children, especially young children, don't make the same kinds of distinctions we do of what is real and what is fantasy," says Dorothy G. Singer, a child psychologist and co-director of Yale University's Family TV Research Center. 

   In defending their commercials, many advertisers argue that such critics underestimate today's savvy children. 
"Kids aren't dummies," says Jerry Sachs, president of Sachs, Finley &amp; Co., the Los Angeles ad agency that created the Cricket spot. 
As for that ad, he says, "children understand the difference between live action and animation. 
We sold I don't know how many hundreds of thousands of that thing, and I think we got two letters saying the child was disappointed. 
That's an incredibly small amount." 

   Advertisers say, too, that a spot's failure to meet network standards doesn't necessarily make it a bad commercial. 
"People say you're trying to be misleading or deceptive, and that doesn't make good sense for us to do that," says Robert Moorman, a senior vice president of Tonka Inc.'s ad agency, Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor. 
Since most toys are part of large product lines, he explains, kids who are deceived "aren't going to want to buy any other part of the line." 

   Still, many toy makers concede that fierce competition is pushing them to test the limits of less-fettered TV outlets. 
After all, hundreds of toy makers are vying for a share of the $9 billion to $10 billion spent on toys annually. 
If toy stores carried just one of every kind of toy produced this year, their shelves would be crammed with some 40,000 items -- and that doesn't include such electronic toys as video games. 

   At Mattel Toys Inc., "there was a period of time several years ago when we went to some non-network commercials hoping to be able to do better battle" with competitors, says Martin Miller, senior vice president of marketing research and planning for the company. 
"A lot of our competitors were going to non-network, and we thought, 'Oh, my goodness, we have to combat that.'" 

   A 1987 independent-TV spot for one of Mattel's Masters of the Universe dolls, for example, showed the toy appearing to pick up other figures automatically, while a voice-over intoned, "When Monstroid gets wound up, it grabs." 
In fact, figures had to be placed in its claws. 
A 1985 spot for Mattel's Rainbow Brite dolls was almost completely animated; it didn't even show the product until a brief shot at the end. 

   CARU questioned whether the first ad was misleading and whether the second gave kids unreasonable expectations. (Mattel's dancing-Barbie spot, which dates from the same period, wasn't challenged.) 

   While Mattel says it doesn't believe its commercials were misleading, it no longer creates different ads for non-network TV -- and for a pragmatic reason. 
"When all is said and done, they didn't necessarily do a better job of selling the product," Mr. Miller explains. 
He says Mattel studied commercials for about 200 of its products over three years to determine whether network or non-network spots sold best. 
"We found absolutely no difference," he says. 

   As a result, Mr. Miller adds, Mattel "made a conscious decision in 1987" to stop making commercials that aren't network-legal. 
About half of the toy maker's annual $40 million to $60 million ad budget goes to network TV. 

   Other toy makers, however, are turning their attention toward non-network TV. 
Among these are Tonka's Parker Brothers division, which currently advertises such games as Monopoly and Clue primarily on network. 
"We probably will have a concept this year that there's no way we could get through the three (major) networks," says John Hurlbut, senior vice president of HBM/Creamer Inc., Parker's ad agency. 
"We want a concept that is more exciting -- more unusual -- than the networks will allow." 

   While a third to a half of Parker's $15 million to $20 million ad budget usually goes into network TV, "that number is likely to go down," Mr. Hurlbut says. 
In explaining the move to non-network, he, too, cites growing competition for kids' dollars, which he says comes as well from other advertisers to children -- such as cereal and candy makers -- that aren't subject to the same restraints on network TV. Besides, he adds, non-network TV can be a less expensive way to reach kids. 

   It costs about $7 for advertisers to reach 1,000 kids during Saturday morning network programs, but only about $4.50 to reach 1,000 kids watching syndicated programs on independent stations, according to Bohbot &amp; Cohn Advertising Inc., a media buying firm specializing in the children's market. 
Cable is even cheaper, at about $2.25 per thousand kids. 

   For their part, non-network TV executives say they are responsible programmers and haven't heard complaints about kid's advertising. 
Cable-industry executives add that most large cable networks running kid's ads, such as Nickelodeon, have their own strict standards. 
"This is the first I've heard of anybody producing two different commercials," says Preston Padden, president of the Association of Independent Television Stations. 

   That silence may not last long. 
Action for Children's Television, an influential Boston activist group, is setting its sights on the issue. 
ACT has recently lobbied intensively for a bill, just passed by the House and expected to get Senate approval, that would limit the amount of commercial time in children's programs. 

   "ACT has been so busy focusing on macro problems that we haven't had time to focus on these differences" between network and non-network ads, says Peggy Charren, president of the group. 
"Now that we have our bill, we will be able to go back to looking at specific commercials. 
We did a lot of that in the 1970s, and we're going to do a lot of it in the late 1980s and 1990s." 

   ---

                  A Sampling of Guidelines
   Each of the major television networks has its own set of guidelines for children's advertising, although the basics are very similar. A few rules, such as the requirement of a static "island" shot at the end, are written in stone; others however, occasionally can be negotiated.
   Many of the rules below apply specifically to toys. The networks also have special guidelines for kid's food commercials and for kid's commercials that offer premiums.
                                        ABC     CBS     NBC
    Must not overglamorize product       X       X       X
    No exhortative language, such as
       "Ask Mom to buy ..."              X       X       X
    No realistic war settings            X               X
    Generally no celebrity endorsements  X   Case-by-    X
                                                case
    Can't use "only" or "just"
       in regard to price                X       X       X
    Show only two toys per child or
       maximum of six per commercial     X               X
    Five-second "island" showing product
       against plain background
       at end of spot                    X       X       X
                                                    (4 to 5)
    Animation restricted to
       one-third of a commercial         X               X
    Generally no comparative        Case-by   Handle
       or superiority claims          case    w/care     X
    No costumes or props not
       available with the toy            X               X
    No child or toy can appear
       in animated segments              X               X
    Three-second establishing shot
       of toy in relation to child       X       X
                                            (2.5 to 3)
    No shots under one second in length          X
    Must show distance a toy can travel
       before stopping on its own                X

</TEXT>
</DOC>
