ID: 235	RANK: 95	SCORE: 15.853633
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870722-0024 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Calculating the Risks in a Fickle Business
---
By Stephen J. Sansweet
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MAT </IN>
<DATELINE> HAWTHORNE, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   John W. Amerman, the new chairman, president and chief executive officer of Mattel Inc., doesn't mind taking risks -- as long as he can limit the downside. 

   For relaxation, the trim, white-haired, 55-year-old executive likes to hit golf balls into the Pacific from the bluff outside his ranch-style home in the exclusive enclave of Palos Verdes, Calif. 
He realizes he'll lose them. 
"The best shots go beyond the reef," he says. 
But they're undersized balls that cost only a nickel each. 

   In the five months since Mr. Amerman took over from a short-lived triumvirate that had proved too awkward to run a billion-dollar international toy company, he has shown a similar attitude in running a business that is faddish and risky by its very nature. 
He is willing to take the plunge, but he wants to manage the risk factor as much as possible. 

   Mr. Amerman has also shown his thrifty nature at work. 
Mattel's corporate staff has just undergone a microscopic inspection that has resulted in slicing out several layers of management, the elimination of 300 positions (about 15% of the staff), and an annualized reduction in overhead expense of $20 million. 

   "The day I became chief executive I gathered all our people in the cafeteria and told them, 'Let's open the windows and get some fresh air in here -- and also have some fun,'" Mr. Amerman recounts. 
He concedes that what followed were several months of uncertainty as 130 separate task forces delivered detailed reports and recommendations for 17 straight working days, 12 hours a day. 

   Yet he was willing to "spend a couple of bucks" to have the hallway outside the cafeteria painted, plants added and pictures hung. 
"People have to see there are better days ahead," Mr. Amerman says. 
"Morale is coming back." 

   Mattel has also been busy with a financial restructuring that replaced nearly $118 million of expensive long-term debt with cheaper financing. 
The company's effective interest rate on those funds has dropped to about 10% from more than 20%, resulting in an annualized savings of about $15 million, Mr. Amerman says. 
And since Mattel has a tax-loss carry-forward of about $172 million to work off, much of the savings in interest and overhead will go directly to the bottom line or help pay off some of the company's $350 million in long-term debt. 

   Last year Mattel had a net loss of $951,000 compared with year-earlier net income of $78.7 million, or $1.42 a share. 

   "The break-even level for our domestic business was just too high," says Mr. Amerman, who headed the company's fast-growing international operations since he joined the company in 1980. 
"And we forgot one of the basic tenets of the industry -- don't leave a lot of product on the shelves at the end of the year." 
Retailers were stuck with lots of leftover Masters of the Universe action figures and Rainbow Brite dolls, once top sellers for Mattel. 

   Yet even Mr. Amerman's impressive international experience doesn't always prepare Mattel for the quirks of some foreign markets. 
The company recently started operations in India and was surprised to find that the Masters line and Hot Wheel cars far outsold the perennial star, Barbie. 
"Boys dominate the culture there," he observes. 

   Three months after Mr. Amerman was named to his new posts, Mattel's president, Thomas Kalinske, 42, resigned to head operations at a smaller toy company. 
Mr. Kalinske had been responsible for Mattel's domestic operations, but Mr. Amerman says Mr. Kalinske left of his own volition and that he was "sorry to see him go." 

   Executives who know Mr. Amerman say he has a reputation for being "a close-to-the-vest kind of guy." 
Says one official, "He leaves people a little uncertain as to what he's thinking, but I just see that as a characteristic that you deal with and not a defect." 
Mr. Amerman says he is determined to loosen Mattel's highly centralized structure and "push decision making down a couple of levels to speed up the process." 

   The executive, who plays some tennis as well as golf and works out to keep in shape, says he is blessed with "tremendous energy." 
That will come in handy as he tries to complete a turnaround of Mattel and keep it on an even keel. 
The company, like others in the industry, has gone through cycles of high earnings followed by substantial losses. 

   Mr. Amerman also has to fight off constant rumors of unfriendly takeovers. 
Most center on the 19.2% stake held by E.M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Co., which has been a major Mattel holder since it helped the company restructure in 1984. 
Other major stakes are held by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. for itself and clients, and RJR Ltd., a Los Angeles investment partnership whose general partner, attorney Richard J. Riordan, is a Mattel director. 
"We ain't goin' anyplace," insists Lionel I. Pincus, chairman and chief executive of Warburg Pincus. 
Mr. Pincus, clearly exasperated by the constant rumors, says his firm hasn't ever held conversations about selling its Mattel shares (it bought an additional one million shares July 1) and sees the holdings as a long-term investment in "a basic company in a basic industry," 

   In fact, Mattel has had some preliminary discussions about
making some acquisitions of its own. "We're looking at
smaller companies where we'd have the opportunity to sell new
product lines on a world-wide basis," Mr. Amerman says.
   Mr. Amerman clearly relishes his new job. 
He says he originally came to Mattel after a career marketing consumer products because "I thought I had a better shot at the top job here." 

   The man who hired him, longtime Mattel Chairman Arthur Spear, who retired last December, praises Mr. Amerman's administrative skills. 
"I think he'll rebuild a strong organization, one that will be stronger than ever." 
Mr. Spear is quick to note, however, that some of the "fixes" Mr. Amerman has administered were started by his administration. 
"The company has undergone some trauma, and whether I would have done it in exactly the same way is academic, because it needed to be done." 

   Mr. Amerman, ever the marketer, says Mattel is "very excited" by retailer reception to some of this year's new toys, especially Hot Looks, an 18-inch high-fashion doll, and Baby Heather, a doll with a 400-word vocabulary that responds to speech. 
The company has already started showing its biggest accounts toys for 1988, including an interactive audio-visual player and software. 

   While Mr. Amerman says his top priority is to rebuild domestic operations and gain market share for Mattel, he waxes enthusiastic about his roots -- the international division, which accounts for about 50% of Mattel's sales and has grown at a compounded annual rate of 41% over the past five years. 

   "There are 55 million kids under 15 in the U.S.," he notes. 
"But there are 88 million in Europe; 141 million in the Americas; 149 million in the Far East excluding China. 
And in China," he says, eyes gleaming, pausing for effect, "there are 342 million!" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
