ID: 131	RANK: 24	SCORE: 20.540110
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880802-0105 </DOCNO>
<HL> Remembrances of Things Past: Never Say Unelectable </HL>
<AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   As I wandered around the floor of the 1984 Democratic convention, the recurring question seemed to be whether a woman could ever be elected president, or even vice president, that office only a heart's beat from the presidency. 

   This year I was a stay-at-home, but judging from the TV coverage the question was whether a black could so aspire. 
Frequently, the question was put bluntly. 
Was the fact that the Rev. Jesse Jackson is black what barred him as Gov. Dukakis's running mate? 

   In neither case were the questions really answered. 
Geraldine Ferraro was nominated for vice president in 1984 but the ticket led by Walter Mondale was defeated. 
Ms. Ferraro's presence on that ticket may have had something to do with it, not just because she was a woman but because of some cloudy matters surrounding her conduct as a congresswoman and her husband's legal problems. 
Besides, that year the Democrats were up against Ronald Reagan, then at the height of his political popularity; any Democratic ticket would have lost. 

   As for Mr. Jackson, there were reasons other than race why he was passed over. 
For one, Mr. Dukakis needed a candidate from Texas -- no Democrat has won the presidency without the Lone Star State -- and Sen. Lloyd Bensten has once before defeated Vice President Bush in Texas and is a proven vote-getter in that state. 

   Moreover, as Mayor Andrew Young of Atlanta, himself a black, pointed out, Mr. Jackson for all his charisma has never held a public office or even run for one before. 
Mr. Young thought that a lacuna in the Jackson record. 

   Anyway, the question of a future woman or black as a viable candidate for national office remains moot and will be debatable endlessly. 
For the moment, white males still hold their historical monopoly on both the presidency and vice presidency. 

   I have no crystal ball, but as a senior citizen -- a very senior citizen -- I have a long memory. 
And I remember when other political figures were supposedly unelectable to our highest offices for reasons unrelated to either their sex or their race. 

   From almost the founding of the Republic it was believed that no Roman Catholic could be elected in this basically Protestant country. 
That conventional wisdom seemed borne out by the defeat of Al Smith, the Democratic candidate in 1928. 
Gov. Smith won only 87 electoral votes against Herbert Hoover, and his Catholicism certainly played a part in this. 
There was much dirty propaganda that if Gov. Smith were elected, the pope would sit at his right hand in the Oval Office. 

   But Al Smith was also defeated because he was a premature "wet," favoring the repeal of the Prohibition amendment, and mainly because his opponent was the highly respected Mr. Hoover. 
Because of the Depression that followed, many have forgotten that in 1928 Mr. Hoover was one of our most highly regarded public figures and had been so for 20 years, since his masterly handling of the world relief problem after World War I. 

   Thirty years later, John Kennedy, a devoted Roman Catholic, was elected president with a large share of the votes of the majority Protestants. 
So much for that "conventional wisdom." 

   For a hundred years after our Civil War there was another bit of conventional wisdom: that no Southerner could be elected president. 
True, Woodrow Wilson was born in Virginia, but he won his political fame as governor of New Jersey, so he hardly counted as a Southerner in political terms. 

   But then came Jimmy Carter, a Southerner born and bred, who used the governorship of Georgia as his springboard to the White House. 
He didn't win by much, but he won with a lot of Yankee votes. 
Once more the conventional wisdom got its comeuppance. 

   So I shouldn't be surprised when the day comes that we have a woman or a black (or both) on a winning national ticket. 
Indeed, it may come in the time of many now living and will not seem any more of a "big deal" than having a Southerner or a Catholic in high office. 

   But when that day does come I don't think either will be in the mold of Ms. Ferraro or Mr. Jackson. 
We have long grown accustomed to senators and even governors who are women, and there are many blacks today not only in Congress but as mayors of some of our biggest cities, including Atlanta. 

   These people haven't won their offices by being stridently "feminists" or narrowly black spokesmen. 
They won by exhibiting the same broad regard for their whole constituency as have successful white, male politicians and by a regard for the interests of a broad spectrum of voters. 
They have also learned, often the hard way, how to deal with the problems of government that confront every political leader. 
Neither Ms. Ferraro nor Mr. Jackson fit that mold. 

   Ms. Ferraro had an appealing personality but she floundered when discussing the issues, foreign and domestic, of her time. 
Mr. Jackson is, without doubt, charismatic in person and a stem-winding orator. 
But if that was all that was required we would have had William Jennings Bryan for president in 1896 or 1900, when both times he raised the Democratic delegates to a high pitch of enthusiasm. 

   Jesse Jackson did much the same at this year's convention with a moving sermon, just as he had often done on the campaign trail. 
But a sermon it was, long on idealism and short on ways and means to achieve any of his desires. 
You could applaud the rhetoric but not the political program because you couldn't find one. 

   The future presidential nominee of a woman or a black will seem little different from past or present ones except for their sex or the color of their skin. 
Like their white, male predecessors they will have a record in public service to be examined by the electorate. 
They will doubtless be middle-aged and, whatever their origins, they will share the manner and values of the middle class that embraces the great majority of our voters. 

   When such a candidate, female or black, will make it to the White House I have no idea. 
All I can say is that a remembrance of things past convinces me never to say never in American politics. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
