ID: 131	RANK: 42	SCORE: 19.012312
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880907-0115 </DOCNO>
<HL> Media Got Singed for Overcooking in Quayle Roast </HL>
<AUTHOR> S. Robert Lichter </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE CNG </G>
<TEXT>
   Lesley Stahl called him "the vice presidential pick that ate the Republican convention." 
By week's end, however, it was the media that stood accused of a feeding frenzy that featured Quayle under glass. 
Have the media treated Dan Quayle unfairly? 
If so, why are the Republicans leading in the polls for the first time this summer? 
The answers involve not just the media but the way they interact with both the candidates and the public in presidential elections. 

   Sen. Quayle actually received good early notices, according to the Center for Media and Public Affairs' analysis of election news. 
During the networks' Republican convention coverage from Aug. 16 through Aug. 18, most comments about him were positive and even reporters displayed more skepticism than outright criticism. 
This reflects the peculiar status of party conventions as prime-time media events scripted by political consultants rather than network producers. 
Everywhere the cameras turned, they found another delegate waiting to praise the new running mate. 

   The regular evening news was where the coverage got rough. 
During the 12 days after his nomination, the three major networks ran 93 stories on Sen. Quayle. 
That was more stories than any presidential candidate but George Bush attracted throughout the entire primary season. 
And without sound bites from those friendly convention delegates, Sen. Quayle's coverage took a sharp downturn. 
Questions about his military service record popped up in 50 stories. 
His privileged family background came up in 19 stories, and his relationship to lobbyist Paula Parkinson was the focus of 13 reports. 

   On ABC, Democratic pollster Peter Hart called Sen. Quayle "a politically mildewed candidate" whose "odor" is "never going to be erased." 
NBC's Dennis Murphy claimed he would be a "hard sell" to Vietnam veterans. 
Mr. Murphy interviewed one vet who called National Guard service "no different than going to Canada." 
And CBS correspondent Jacqueline Adams termed Sen. Quayle "a not-ready-for-prime-time player" whose "pro-defense rhetoric was almost comical." 

   Overall, only one in three evaluations of Sen. Quayle by reporters and other nonpartisan sources were positive (neutral comments are excluded in the sample). 
That's worse press than any presidential candidate received during the primary race, with the exception of Gary Hart's abysmal 4-to-1 negative ratio. 
By contrast, Mr. Bush's primary coverage was about evenly divided between positive and negative, Michael Dukakis's was nearly 3 to 2 positive, and Jesse Jackson's was 3 to 1 positive. 

   Perhaps the most appropriate comparison, however, is to the 1984 Democratic vice-presidential nominee. 
Geraldine Ferraro was also assailed by charges of scandal or impropriety, and she complained bitterly about her media coverage. 
Yet a study by political scientist Michael Robinson, a self-described liberal Democrat, found that Ms. Ferraro had the most positive "spin" of any candidate on TV news that fall. 
Moreover, questions about her finances and credentials together generated only nine stories on the evening news. 
Ms. Ferraro's foibles were easily eclipsed by TV's attention to Mr. Bush's blunders that year, from his braggadocio that he "kicked a little ass" to his fumbling attempts to define "shame." 

   Even if Ms. Ferraro's media treatment was milder than Sen. Quayle's, the outcome may be instructive for the 1988 race. 
Strong majorities of the public eventually approved of the way she handled questions about her finances, and the controversy apparently didn't affect the election. 
Most people vote for the presidential candidate, not the running mate. 
What did hurt the Democrats was the 2-to-1 majority of those who thought Walter Mondale chose Ms. Ferraro because of pressure from women's groups. 
The vice-presidential choice is important mainly as an indicator of the values and judgment of the presidential nominee. 

   Ironically, that's how the Quayle episode redounded to Mr. Bush's benefit. 
The controversy allowed Mr. Bush to reinforce his powerful acceptance speech with an object lesson in leadership. 
He was on-screen every night defending his running mate in a manner that displayed the decisive, steadfast, take-charge image his advisers have long hoped for. 

   Even in an age of image-making, of course, reality still counts in politics. 
If the "draft-dodger" label had stuck, Sen. Quayle might well have taken Mr. Bush down with him. 
Instead Sen. Quayle ended up looking unfairly maligned by the media attack pack, and Mr. Bush dominated the public agenda with a successful defense of both his subordinate and his own judgment. 
The payoff was the biggest post-convention "bump" in the polls since 1972. 
No wonder Pat Buchanan was moved to say, "Thank you Dan Rather." 

   The Democrats still have plenty of time to rebound from the GOP's August surprise. 
The real victim of the Quayle hunt was the media. 
The latest "Times Mirror" polls show that majorities of the public think the story was overplayed and unfair to Sen. Quayle. 
More significantly, the proportion of those who see a Democratic bias in the news has more than doubled since May (from 10% to 22%), and the proportion of those who believe news organizations "get the facts straight" has dropped from 49% to 40%. 

   As Dan Rather learned in his set-to with Mr. Bush in January, attack journalism is not without risk. 
When the press takes on the role of political opposition, the electorate may reject the messenger as well as the message. 
That's why two weeks of roasting Quayle left the Republicans fat and happy but gave the networks indigestion. 

   ---
   Mr. Lichter is co-director of the Center for Media and Public Affairs. 

   (Revised WSJ Sept. 8, 1988)
   (Revised WSJ Sept. 12, 1988)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
