ID: 131	RANK: 49	SCORE: 18.591068
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871016-0166 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

---
By Ellen Hume
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/16/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Democratic Rep. Patricia Schroeder, who scrapped her possible presidential candidacy last month, isn't the only woman who has decided not to run for high federal office this time around. 

   It's still early yet, but candidate recruiters from both parties say they are having trouble getting women to run for the House and Senate in 1988. 
The bipartisan Women's Campaign Fund candidate school has signed up only about half a dozen potential 1988 House candidates, and neither party anticipates having a serious female contender for the Senate next fall. 
There are currently 23 female House members and two female senators. 

   Record numbers of women are running for and winning state and local offices, and the number of women nominees for federal office rose steadily from three Senate and 44 House candidates in 1974 to 10 Senate and 65 House candidates in 1984. 
But the number of federal candidates has reached a plateau since then, and some analysts say it could even decline next year. 

   "We're still trying to find bodies," says Linda DiVall, a GOP pollster and consultant to the National Republican Congressional Committee. 
Observes Vermont Democratic Gov. Madeleine Kunin, who is seeking re-election rather than running for an open Senate seat next year: "There's a feeling not only among candidates, but women supporters are less willing to say, 'Run, run, run.'" 

   Many political analysts figured that Rep. Geraldine Ferraro's selection as the Democratic vice presidential candidate would set off a wave of women candidates. 
But the euphoria of Ms. Ferraro's candidacy has faded now, and analysts say the present mood is colored by disappointment at the embarrassment the public limelight has caused her family and at Mrs. Schroeder's tearful decision not to run for president. 

   The Ferraro experience especially seems to have caused some women to have second thoughts. 
"I have heard some women in politics say: 'I wouldn't like what happened to Gerry Ferraro to happen to me. 
I don't know if I'm willing to expose myself to that sort of brutal pressure,'" says Ruth Mandel, director of the Center for the American Woman and Politics at Rutgers University. 
The recent string of scandals in the campaigns of male Democratic presidential candidates has also contributed to a "chilling effect," Gov. Kunin says. 

   The issue of spousal financial disclosure has proven to be a particular stumbling block. 
Women candidates more frequently have spouses with business dealings, which must be disclosed publicly under federal law. 
California Secretary of State March Fong Eu, considered a formidable potential challenger to GOP Sen. Pete Wilson, now isn't expected to run in the Democratic primary because her husband doesn't want to disclose his finances. 
"If he doesn't disclose, she can't run," says Joanne Howes, a veteran political consultant. 

   Colorado Rep. Schroeder's complaint that she was under pressure to change her style and give up too much of herself to run for president strikes a chord among other women officeholders as well. 
"I think a woman can do it," says Kansas Republican Sen. Nancy Kassebaum, who is often mentioned as a possible GOP vice presidential prospect. 
"That's not the question in my mind. 
It's 'How much do you want to give up?'" 

   The controversy about Mrs. Schroeder's show of emotion when she announced she wasn't running "is another example of the extraordinary burden that any individual political woman carries with her," says Ms. Mandel. 
"She can never run without everything that she does being judged as a statement about womankind in general." 

   Most women suggest that the current reluctance to run for federal office will prove temporary. 
"There aren't very many running at the upper reaches, but there are a lot in the pipeline," emphasizes Anne Wexler, a Washington lobbyist who helped run Ms. Ferraro's campaign. 
She and others are encouraged that women are choosing races they're more likely to win, are moving up steadily in state government, and now hold powerful behind-the-scenes jobs on campaigns and in congressional offices. 
"The landscape in Washington is totally different from what it was 10 years ago," she concludes. 

   Eleanor Smeal, former president of the National Organization for Women, has launched a new group called the Fund for the Feminist Majority, which is sending speakers around the country urging women to run for all levels of government office. 

   But Sen. Kassebaum observes that there are still too few role models at the top to break the ice with the voters. 
"We haven't had a woman who's secretary of defense, secretary of state," she says. 
"We've never had a woman really in the top inner council of government." 

   There also are special factors in the 1988 cycle that are limiting the pool of women running for national office. 
There are fewer open seats available than in previous recent congressional elections. 
"This looks like a bad year to run for Congress, and women know it," says Celinda Lake of the Women's Campaign Fund. 
In addition, the free-for-all presidential race in both parties has siphoned off women who might be congressional candidates in other years but who instead are working for presidential hopefuls. 

   But analysts also are concerned about other long-term reasons why women may not be running for federal office. 
A Women's Campaign Fund survey found that women officeholders are less likely to attempt a major political leap upward -- say from school board to Congress -- than are their male counterparts. 

   "I sometimes conclude, and it is a reluctant conclusion, that women continue to harbor some inner barriers," Gov. Kunin told the National Women's Political Caucus convention this summer. 
"At some gut level, the art of politics -- combative, competitive, self-asserting -- is sometimes difficult to integrate with our feminine selves." 

   Even when they don't have such internal doubts, women candidates for federal office still have an uphill struggle with the electorate. 
While The Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll has shown a steady increase since 1984 in the number of Americans who think the country is ready for a woman president, 65% still don't think the country is prepared for such a change. 
A new survey for the National Women's Political Caucus by Ms. DiVall and another pollster, Harrison Hickman, found that while 20% of Americans think a woman would do better than a man in serving on a school board, 13% think she would do a worse job in the House, 16% think she would do a worse job in the Senate and 31% think she would do worse as president. 

   Despite all the gains of recent years in the number of women candidates and officeholders, a woman running for federal office still "has to be better, stronger and sharper than a male counterpart with all the same credentials if she is going to win," concludes Ms. DiVall. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
