ID: 131	RANK: 65	SCORE: 17.590015
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881013-0131 </DOCNO>
<HL> Orthodox Church Is Rent Over Dukakis </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alexander F.C. Webster </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   The presidential candidacy of Michael Dukakis has confronted the Eastern Orthodox community in America with a cruel dilemma. 
Members of this faith, which comprises about four million Americans, must choose between pride in "one of their own" and fidelity to the religious and moral precepts of their Orthodox Christian tradition. 
The inevitable result, whether Mr. Dukakis wins or loses in November, will be a defeat for the Orthodox community: a needless disruption of the already fragile unity of the church's ethnic communities as many Greek Orthodox rush to embrace a native son and a dangerous compromise of church identity. 

   Mr. Dukakis and his campaign staff portray the governor of Massachusetts as "a member in good standing" of the Greek Orthodox Church. 
The Orthodox in America finally have a candidate of their own for the presidency, or so it would seem, much as the Roman Catholic community broke the religious barrier in 1960 with the candidacy of John F. Kennedy. 
"Camelot," 1988-style, is finally within reach of Orthodox Americans, whose forebears emigrated from Greece, Eastern Europe and the Middle East. 

   However tempting this parallel may be to some Orthodox, especially Greek-Americans, a more appropriate model is the vice presidential candidacy of Geraldine Ferraro in 1984. 
Ms. Ferraro repeatedly professed pride in her Italian ancestry and loyalty to the Roman Catholic Church. 
Even when several prominent Catholic hierarchs, led by then-Archbishop John O'Connor of New York, disputed her claim that her church permits Catholics in good conscience to hold pro-abortion views, Ms. Ferraro persisted in her position. 

   Michael Dukakis is the Geraldine Ferraro of the Orthodox Church. 
If the congresswoman from Queens was no conventional Catholic, then the governor of Massachusetts is no ordinary Orthodox. 
His marriage to a non-Christian and his refusal to baptize his two daughters automatically excommunicated him from the church of his ancestry. 
To be sure, these are personal religious matters that in the usual course of events should be irrelevant to a presidential campaign. 
But the governor's deliberate misrepresentation of his religious status raises them -- and along with them questions about his character. 

   Like Ms. Ferraro, Mr. Dukakis is a fervent advocate of abortion "rights" -- against the teaching of the church to which he claims to belong. 
On this score he is not the only pro-abortion public official who claims to be Orthodox. 
In Congress, Sen. Paul Sarbanes (D., Md.), Rep. Olympia Snowe (R., Maine), and Rep. George Gekas (R., Pa.) are "pro-choice." 
They are outnumbered by Orthodox champions of the pro-life position: Reps. 
Gus Yatron (D., Pa.), Nick Mavroules (D., Mass.), Michael Bilirakis (R., Fla.) and Helen Delich Bentley (R., Md.). 

   Mr. Dukakis's words have resonated well with the Greek-American community -- including, apparently, many of the two million Greek Orthodox. 
Hellenic organizations have funneled enormous financial resources into his campaign -- reportedly as much as $5.8 million, or 20% of his war chest, during the Democratic primary contest -- and prominent Greek Orthodox bishops and other clergy have provided public encouragement for his candidacy. 

   But storm clouds are threatening this harmonious Hellenic "symphonia." 
Allies and adversaries of Dukakis the Greek Orthodox Candidate now stand arrayed against one another like opposing phalanxes from the era of Alexander the Great. 

   On one side are bishops, priests and other spokesmen of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, who support the governor's claim that he is a member of the church. 
The governor's greatest ally is Archbishop Iakovos Coucouzes, the most recognizable Orthodox face in America. 
Archbishop Iakovos has been quoted as saying Mr. Dukakis "is a member of the church" and "has embraced it all these years." 
At the Greek Orthodox Clergy-Laity Congress in Boston in July, Archbishop Iakovos awarded the governor the Medal of St. Andrew for public service. 

   On the other side is a growing cadre of Orthodox hierarchs and clergy, mostly non-Greek, who believe the governor is both misrepresenting his religious faith and corrupting the public image of the Orthodox Church. 
These people are not as well-known as Archbishop Iakovos, but their claim to authority as Orthodox spokesmen is just as valid. 

   Critical comments have been voiced by Bishop Kallistos Ware of Oxford University; Bishop Hilarion Kapral and 12 other clergy of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia; Bishop Job Osaky of Hartford and New England for the Orthodox Church in America; and three priests of the Greek Archdiocese, the Rev. Mark Andrews, the Rev. John Loejos and the Rev. Tom Avramis. 
Most recently, 16 priests asked that Mr. Dukakis be "disinvited" from a religious celebration in honor of Archbishop Iakovos scheduled for Washington on Oct. 22. 

   Two bishops of the Orthodox Church in America have issued pastoral letters on the matter. 

   Bishop Herman Swaiko of Philadelphia warns that "those who believe they can 'be' Orthodox" while condoning abortion, euthanasia, or suicide "are deluding themselves and are in danger of eternal damnation." 
Although Bishop Herman doesn't mention Mr. Dukakis by name in his letter, he later said that as far as abortion is concerned his message could be applied to Mr. Dukakis. 

   Bishop Nathaniel Popp of Detroit, who is also the ruling bishop of a predominantly ethnic Orthodox community -- the Romanian Orthodox Episcopate of America -- has issued a thoughtful analysis of what he terms the Orthodox tragedy of the Dukakis drama. 
The personal tragedy of Michael Dukakis, he writes, consists in his choice to become non-Orthodox as demonstrated by his decisions concerning marriage and the faith of his children. 
"In America," the bishop argues, "one can be both Greek and not-Orthodox. 
In the Church one cannot be both Orthodox and not-Orthodox." 

   The larger tragedy, he says, arises from the governor's direct opposition to the teachings of the Church Fathers. 
"Even if the Governor had married a Greek Orthodox in the Church," Bishop Nathaniel writes, "he could not be an abortionist and be in good standing with the Orthodox Christian Church. 
The Church of Christ is PRO-LIFE." 

   As an Orthodox priest, I take no particular pleasure in observing the spectacle of Orthodox bishops disagreeing in public over canonical standards and moral practice. 
Mr. Dukakis's candidacy is plunging the Orthodox community in America into a state of de facto moral schism. 
Whether or not the Orthodox "body" triumphs in the November election, the Orthodox "soul" will have undergone a trial, and Orthodox integrity will be undermined. 
The Dukakis legacy to the church of his baptism will be, at best, a Trojan horse. 

   ---
   Father Alexander, an Orthodox priest, is a research associate at the Ethics and Public Policy Center in Washington. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
