ID: 131	RANK: 90	SCORE: 16.438910
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880510-0035 </DOCNO>
<HL> Campaign '88: Leading Democrats Begin to Focus on Selection Of Dukakis Running Mate as Primaries Near End </HL>
<AUTHOR> David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> CNG </G>
<DATELINE> OMAHA, Neb.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As Michael Dukakis's campaign jet was approaching this city, the Massachusetts governor was shown a legal pad full of calculations showing where Democrats can hope to win electoral votes in the fall and where a running mate might help the ticket. 

   "That's what you do all day long?" said Mr. Dukakis, indicating that he hadn't begun to examine the geography of the general election or think about selecting a running mate. 

   But already leading Democrats and those around Mr. Dukakis are beginning to focus on the choice of a running mate -- probably the most important single decision Mr. Dukakis must make between now and the election. 
A memo on the selection process is floating around the Dukakis campaign. 
Written in 1984 by Richard Moe, a recent Dukakis recruit who was Walter Mondale's chief of staff when Mr. Mondale was vice president, it reportedly advocates a regional approach. 

   One clear challenge for Mr. Dukakis will be to shore up the moderate and conservative elements of the Democratic coalition while at the same time placating the Rev. Jesse Jackson and his supporters. 

   As voters in West Virginia and here in Nebraska go to the polls today and as the candidates gird for the final primaries in California and New Jersey next month, several elements of Mr. Dukakis's choice are emerging: geography; ideological balance, especially on national security; Washington experience as a counterweight to Gov. Dukakis's experience on the state level, and personal chemistry. 

   How Mr. Dukakis, who increasingly has been dropping the phrase "regional balance" into his language, sorts out these elements will determine how he leans in the vice presidential decision, and will help determine what kind of campaign he runs in the autumn. 
Although no formal decision has been made, Paul Brountas, a senior partner of the Boston law firm of Hale &amp; Dorr and a trusted Dukakis adviser, is expected to head up the vice presidential selection effort. 

   Two competing theories are swirling around Democratic circles. 
One holds that Mr. Dukakis should choose a Southern conservative like Sam Nunn of Georgia, who as chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee has solid credentials on national security issues and might help the ticket in the South. 
The other theory holds that a ticket headed by a Massachusetts liberal can't win any Southern states anyhow and that the governor should choose a Midwesterner such as Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, who would be less unpalatable to the party's liberal interests. 

   But these choices bring with them critical political implications. 
If Mr. Dukakis doesn't select a Southern running mate, then he locks himself into a Northern strategy with only faint hopes of picking up the odd Southern state. 
The Northern strategy, which all but cedes 138 electoral votes in the Old Confederacy, offers him almost no margin of error. 

   The Southern strategy gambles that his selection will bring him a handful of the smaller Southern states that President Reagan has tucked under the Republican umbrella or one of the valuable states of Florida and Texas, probably the most Republican-leaning states of the Old Confederacy. 
But if Mr. Dukakis does pick a Southerner he runs the risk of an uphill battle in most of Dixie while potentially drawing away resources from the closely contested Midwest. 

   The result is that Dukakis strategists are confronting a mathematical puzzle, a challenge of political geography. 
With a sweep of the Democratic base, including New York, plus some of the economically distressed Midwest farm states, Mr. Dukakis can reach about 150 electoral votes. 
Add California and the total climbs toward 200. 
Mr. Dukakis is left with coming up with the remainder of the 270 needed to win. 

   The 70 to 75 electoral votes that would stand between him and the White House could come from the industrial Midwest. 
Under this strategy, Gov. Dukakis would have to win at least three of the four big industrial states of Ohio, Illinois, Michigan and Pennsylvania. 
Any electoral votes he loses in those states must be compensated for in the South. 

   There is, moreover, a defensive component to the selection of a running mate. 
Campaign strategists who remember how Sen. Thomas Eagleton of Missouri and Rep. Geraldine Ferraro of New York hurt Democratic tickets in 1972 and 1984 will seek to ensure that the Dukakis choice doesn't burden the ticket in 1988. 
"You start out from the premise that you try to help yourself with the vice presidential selection," says Mr. Moe, who wasn't in the circle that made the Ferraro selection. 
"But sometimes you end up making sure that you're not hurt." 

   How to approach the South lingers as the most important question facing Mr. Dukakis, who despite victories in Texas and Florida in March primaries remains an alien figure in the region. 
A Democratic ticket has never been elected without carrying a majority of the 15 Southern and border states. 
In the last half-century, the Democrats have won the White House only once -- when Franklin Roosevelt won his third term in 1940 -- without a Southerner or a border state resident on the ticket. 

   "It's hard to get past 260 (electoral votes) without the South," says Paul Maslin, a Democratic political strategist. 

   But few experts on Southern politics believe a ticket headed by Mr. Dukakis will win much support in the region. 
"The presence of a Southerner in the vice presidential slot doesn't make Dukakis any more palatable," argues Merle Black, a University of North Carolina political scientist who specializes in Southern politics. 
"He's wasting his time down here." 

   Vice presidential nominees often don't carry their own states, and there's little certainty that either Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen or Florida Sen. Bob Graham would be able to deliver his state to the Dukakis ticket. 
And there isn't any guarantee that Sen. Nunn, who has the support of many Capitol Hill Democrats but whose record troubles civil-rights and labor leaders, would be able to carry more than his home state. 

   But Mr. Nunn's boosters believe the selection of the Georgian would permit Mr. Dukakis to send a reassuring message on national security that would transcend regional boundaries and help address a Democratic weakness. 

   The selection of Sen. Glenn, a former astronaut, fighter pilot and war hero and a moderate voice on foreign-policy questions, might provide some help on national security but would be inspired principally to help the Democrats win the pivotal state of Ohio, which the Democrats have carried only once since the Lyndon Johnson landslide of 1964. 

   Many leading Democrats, including Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton, who has asked not to be considered for the ticket, are urging the Massachusetts governor to select a running mate with Washington experience -- a factor that could work against Sen. Graham, who has served less than two years in the Senate. 

   With the nomination not yet clinched, Mr. Dukakis is loathe to devote much attention to these questions. 
"There'll be plenty of time to deal with this," he said on the flight to Omaha late last week. 

   But some leading Democrats believe that Mr. Dukakis, who has little familiarity with the politics of the Electoral College, should turn his attention to this question sooner rather than later. 
"The campaign needs a whole remedial training course," says one leading Democratic strategist. 
"They're still in kindergarten and the Republicans are in graduate school." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
