ID: 131	RANK: 92	SCORE: 16.204235
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880720-0022 </DOCNO>
<HL> Dukakis Detail Woman Keeps Convention Going With Staff Showing How Far Females Have Come </HL>
<AUTHOR> Michael McQueen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Marcia Lee Hale elbows her way to the floor of the Democratic National Convention here, moving past the Tennessee delegation, toward New York and South Carolina, and on to the row of campaign staff trailers parked out back. 
Is everyone here? 
Are the phones working? 
Does everyone know what to do? she asks. 

   A Tennessee delegation whip, Larry Harrington, is buffeted by the growing crowd. 
"It's just like being a blocker, but it's going real well," he reports to her. 
Ms. Hale, who is the convention manager for the likely Democratic candidate, Michael Dukakis, slaps him on the back in encouragement and moves on. 

   "It's not very glamorous stuff," she concedes. 
Still, to a large part, Mr. Dukakis's reputation as a detail man, an in-charge manager, depends on the careful running and smooth outcome of this convention. 

   And it's a measure of the unprecedented role women play in the Dukakis campaign that Ms. Hale, a 36-year-old former city planner from South Carolina, is the detail woman behind the detail man. 
Ms. Hale is one of about a dozen women in senior positions in the Dukakis campaign, commanding greater resources, staff and probably influence than women have ever had in a national campaign. 

   The Dukakis effort is led by the highly visible campaign manager, Susan Estrich, the first woman ever to direct a national political campaign. 
In addition, senior Dukakis aides include Finance Director Kristin DeMong; Deputy National Field Director Donna Brazile, and Joyce Carrier, director of advance. 
Mr. Dukakis's foreign-policy adviser is Madeleine Albright, a Georgetown University professor. 
At least half the paid campaign staff of about 260 are women, says the campaign's personnel director -- also a woman. 

   "I decided to do Dukakis because I thought his values were closest to mine, I thought he could win, I knew there were very good, competent people -- and it was a good campaign for women," says Wendy Sherman, who ran Mr. Dukakis's Washington office during the primary season. 
"Women were in prominent positions and were being recruited in." 

   Mr. Dukakis also sees his campaign's hiring of women in both feminist and pragmatic terms. 
"I'm somebody who's had very strong and very good women in all of my administrations," he said in a recent interview. 
"Any political leader or chief executive who doesn't is denying himself a great deal of talent." 

   To be sure, there are signs that women haven't cracked every barrier, even in the Dukakis campaign. 
The campaign directors for the nine states with the largest electoral votes include only one woman -- Kathi Rogers, who will spearhead the Ohio effort. 
And although Ms. Hale directed Mr. Dukakis's field operations for the massive Super Tuesday southern primary, the largest state voting that day, Texas, had its own director who didn't report to her. 

   But for the most part, women have melded into the governor's presidential campaign without either notice or drama. 
"I think women in the Dukakis campaign . . . have gotten to where we want to be -- which is, you're hired because you've got particular talents," says Ms. Hale. 
"I think we've arrived." 

   "Certainly the Dukakis campaign has set a precedent," says Irene Natividad of the National Women's Political Caucus. 
"These are seasoned, experienced political pros, and these are the type of women who are in ascendance." 

   By contrast, the top echelons of the Bush campaign were almost devoid of women before the recent hiring of public-relations executive Sheila Tate as communications director. 
Even now, if the top Bush aides were to hold a critical meeting, the table probably would be all male. 

   A number of the top Dukakis women, including Ms. Estrich, come from Massachusetts. 
But the campaign also reached out to other campaigns and regions. 
Ms. Brazile was a top organizer for Jesse Jackson in 1984 and for Rep. Richard Gephardt this year. 
Ms. Albright worked for Zbigniew Brzezinski in the Carter White House, and Ms. Sherman ran Rep. Barbara Mikulski's successful 1986 Senate campaign in Maryland. 

   Ms. Hale and some of the other women on the Dukakis campaign got their start in national politics in the 1984 Mondale-Ferraro campaign, where Ms. Hale was Geraldine Ferraro's director of advance. 
"One of the . . . positive things about the Dukakis campaign is they very successfully recruited some of the top political women," said William Carrick, campaign manager of the rival presidential bid of Missouri Congressman Richard Gephardt. 
He noted that "women who had had secondary roles in the past (presidential) campaign now have had primary roles." 

   Ms. Hale, for example, went on to major posts with the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, then joined the Dukakis campaign last fall as its Southern field director. 

   Now, as Mr. Dukakis's convention manager, she and her staff have set up a multilayered whip system to keep Dukakis delegates and their votes in line. 
They've set up a phone system that will keep key staffers in touch with the delegates, the candidate and each other. 
They've arranged 1,280 hotel and dormitory rooms for Dukakis workers, organized a bus system to get them to the convention, met the volunteers at the airport, distributed the blue-and-white signs that delegates wave to the cameras, and planted the trailers from which campaign managers are staging the convention that introduces the Massachusetts governor to the voters. 

   By seeing that all the details are covered, Ms. Hale will permit Mr. Dukakis to control the proceedings now that his long-running dispute with the Rev. Jesse Jackson appears resolved. 
"The Dukakis people have this as well organized as any (convention) I've ever seen," says New York Rep. Charles Schumer, a Dukakis floor manager. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
