ID: 241	RANK: 92	SCORE: 12.354794
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880811-0145 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Chukkers and Parties With the Cartier Crowd </HL>
<AUTHOR> Terry Trucco </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Egham, England  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In June, it was horse racing at Royal Ascot. 
Then came rowing at Henley and opera at Glyndebourne. 
And last week, on a damp, windy Sunday, the place to be for royal watching, celebrity spotting, champagne sipping and a dose of high-gloss hobnobbing was the Guards Polo Club at Windsor Great Park, the immaculate polo grounds in the shadow of Windsor Castle. 

   The day's polo and parties, known as the Cartier International, attracted the predictable collection of beautiful people -- and aspiring beautiful people -- who seem a fixture at the long string of social events (and social-climbing opportunities) that form the so-called English Season, or Silly Season, depending on your sentiments. 
The season actually runs the entire year, stretching from January's rugby at Twickenham to December's fox hunts in the Shires. 
But it's the summer lineup that separates the A list from the B list and enables the English to do what they seem to enjoy most-dress up, defy the weather and toast what remains of the empire. 

   Most alluring, of course, are those events starring members of the royal family, which makes the Cartier International particularly potent. 
Not only do the Queen and the Princess of Wales pass out the trophies, Prince Charles always plays in the day's second match, the Silver Jubilee Cup. 
This year loyal subjects watched their future king's team bow to a quartet of Frenchman that included a 13-year-old boy. 
But the Queen, the perfunctory silk scarf covering her hair, still allowed her son to kiss her hand when she presented his consolation prize. 

   The polo was faster, feistier and far more exciting earlier in the day when an English foursome narrowly defeated a top team of Americans by 8 goals to 7 to take the Coronation Cup, one of polo's most coveted awards. 
For those who follow the sport the match also was controversial. 
Though the cup traditionally has pitted the best of England against the best of North America, England's top player didn't participate. 
And since the two teams must have an evenly matched handicap (players are ranked by the number of goals they average), that kept a top American at home. 
It also lowered the game's overall quality, with the two teams each handicapped at 24 (a normal Coronation Cup handicap is 30). 

   The host team's gerrymandering clearly annoyed the North Americans, who noted that this was England's first Coronation Cup in years. 
"This year they tried to change the format to come up with a team that could win," said American team captain Dale Smicklas, a tall, bronzed Floridian. 

   But the crowd, nearly 25,000 strong, hardly seemed to notice, applauding what most agreed were some thrilling plays. 
"I don't think the people here give a damn about who wins or loses," said U.S. player Rob Walton, who sipped a beer after the game. 
"They come to have a good time." 

   The good time, and the good will that goes with it, were carefully choreographed by Cartier, which has been inveigled to elevate the day from a clubby gathering of polo aficionados to a full-scale social and public relations event. 
Five years ago, the large jewelry concern agreed to underwrite the day, donating the proceeds to support the sport. 
In return it got to shape the festivities, glamorizing things with a sprinkling of film and rock music personalities (Jane Seymour, Pierce Brosnan and Ringo Starr supplied this year's dazzle) and flying in a roster of writers and photographers for publicity. 

   The day soon attracted that new, and in the view of society's old guard, unwelcome addition to the English season, the corporate hospitality tent, well-stocked with business executives and champagne. 
Attendance has increased tenfold since Cartier started managing things. 
"It's become a bit like Ascot without hats," proclaimed a well-dressed participant as she sized up a passing Chanel suit. 
Yet much of the growth has been among "commoner families," as one wag put it, who come in by the carload, picnic alongside the grounds and try to spot celebrities through binoculars. 

   "Polo is not only a sport," enthused Cartier president Alain-Dominique Perrin, who masterminded his company's involvement with the game. 
"It's a show, a great quality show. 
The public wants shows and looks for shows." 

   Most agree polo became a show for general audiences in the early 1980s, when the courtship of Charles and Diana unfolded right here on Smith's Lawn. 
The romance of Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson blossomed next, a pattern the bride's mother saw as perfectly natural. 
"They met on the polo field," she told an interviewer shortly before the royal wedding. 
"Doesn't everyone?" 

   None of this means that scores of new polo players are about to emerge from the tenements of East London. 
Polo traces its ancient origins to Persia, but the modern game hails from 19th-century India, where it was popularized by the British Raj. 
The upper classes embraced it when it arrived here in 1869, and its aristocratic reputation has remained intact, largely because it's so costly to play. 
Though only four players form a team, each uses a fresh pony for each chukka, as the game's seven-minute intervals are known. 
As the average game is six chukkas long, that means at least 48 ponies per game. 

   The ponies require years of special training as well, priming them for the precision turns and lightning runs that make the sport exciting. 

   That excitement follows the players off the field. 

   ---
   Ms. Trucco is a free-lance writer based in London. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
