ID: 136	RANK: 33	SCORE: 7.423159
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890726-0083 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890726 </DD>
<AN> 890726-0083. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Art Crime Update:
@  Art for America's Sake
@  ----
@  By Constance Lowenthal </HL>
<DD> 07/26/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<TEXT>
   Unlike many Western nations that are rich in art, the U.S. has no laws limiting the export of cultural treasures. 
Italy, France and Great Britain all have laws to screen major works of art before export, and American buyers have often chafed at restrictions that delayed or undid their purchases. 
However, in anticipation of the May 31 sale of the Stillman Pontormo at Christie's, many Americans began to think for the first time that such restrictions might be a good idea here. 
Although privately owned, this great Italian mannerist portrait had been on loan to American museums for decades. 
The successful bid by the J. Paul Getty Museum brought a collective sigh of relief and blunted the edge of those worries: The painting will stay in America. 
But the problem will not go away. 

   Discussions are just beginning to get serious about whether American painting, sculpture, decorative arts and the art of native Americans should be kept at home. 
On June 20, at the convention of the American Association of Museums in New Orleans, the committee on museology unanimously passed a resolution drafted by Paul N. Perrot, director of the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, recommending that the museum community study the question and present recommendations to the relevant governmental authorities. 
Without restrictions on the export of cultural property, market forces play freely, not only for Rembrandts and van Goghs, but also for home-grown American art, artifacts and documents that speak to our history. 

   ---

   Although the U.S. has no strategy for keeping American heritage at home, our policy of helping other countries protect their cultural heritage is much stronger. 
In 1970, when archaeological plunder was endemic in the jungles of Central America as well as the mountains of Asia Minor and Etruria, Unesco adopted its "Convention on the Means of Prohibiting the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property." 
More than 60 nations are now signatories, but the U.S. is the only one among them that could be described as an art importer. 
France, Britain, Germany, Switzerland and Japan are not parties to the convention. 
The U.S. Senate ratified the convention in 1972, but it was only in 1983 that Congress enacted enabling legislation, passing a bill that was a compromise between archaeological and commercial interests. 

   In accord with that law, the Cultural Property Implementation Act of 1983, the U.S. recently banned the importation of a type of Bolivian textile essential to religious and social ceremonies of the Aymara culture. 
The textiles in question are made from alpaca and vicuna wool in Coroma, a town high in the Bolivian Andes, and have been woven in the same manner since before the advent of the Inca or the Spaniard. 
The textiles have a silken luster, and enough had found their way to the U.S. for the Smithsonian to organize a traveling exhibition, "Aymara Weavings: Ceremonial Textiles of Colonial and 19th-Century Bolivia," in 1983. 
This in spite of export restrictions enacted by Bolivia in 1961. 

   Bolivia submitted a formal request to President Reagan to ban the import of these textiles, saying that the U.S. has been a major market for the weavings. 
Bolivia estimated that about half its sacred textiles had been smuggled out of Bolivia and found their way into American collections. 
The request was reviewed, following the provisions of the legislation, by the Cultural Property Advisory Committee, a group of 11 archaeologists, dealers, private citizens and representatives of the museum community. 
The committee found that the loss created an emergency situation for the Aymara culture and recommended a five-year ban that went into effect on March 14, 1989. 
Customs is the agency charged with enforcing the ban. 
This is the second ban recommended by the committee; the first, in 1987, was to restrict the importation of pre-Hispanic material from El Salvador's Cara Sucia region. 

   ---

   With the arrest in Miami of a former commissioner in the Buenos Aires police department, the stage was set for the recovery of old master paintings stolen in 1983 and 1987 from two museums in Rosario, Argentina. 
Juan Carlos Longo, 53 years old, and his common-law wife, Hilda Arias Longo, 40, were arrested after selling one of the stolen pictures, "Doves and Hens," attributed to Francisco Goya, to an undercover FBI agent. 
Special Agent James D. Keith of the Miami FBI called IFAR to confirm that this picture and others that Mr. Longo said were available were in fact stolen. 
After the sting and the arrests, the couple was extradited to Argentina, where Interpol continued the investigation and, in short order, arrested six other individuals and recovered a second work, "Portrait of Philip II," by Alonso Sanchez Coello, a Spanish 16th-century court painter. 

   ---

   Rodin's "Mask of a Man With a Broken Nose" has been safely returned to the Rodin Museum in Philadelphia, where it was stolen at gunpoint last November. 
An anonymous tip led the authorities to 24-year-old Stephen Shih, an unemployed truck driver, described by neighbors as "really nice," but also as "eccentric, peculiar and odd." 
Mr. Shih was charged with robbery, theft, receiving stolen goods, unlawful restraint and weapons offenses. 
If convicted, he faces a possible 40 years in prison. 
The police had to find the bronze without his help, however, and searches in and around the garage over which he lived were frustrating. 
Eventually, they found "Mask" well-wrapped and hidden in the basement of an apartment building owned by the accused's mother. 
Police and museum officials were jubilant at the happy ending, a rarity in art-theft annals, where the recovery rate hovers around 12%. 

   ---

   Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
