ID: 136	RANK: 41	SCORE: 7.085888
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880722-0146 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Magazine of Art and Larceny </HL>
<AUTHOR> Pam Lambert </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "Sometimes things can get pretty cloak-and-dagger around here," Connie Lowenthal says. 
At the moment, things in the sunny pseudo-Tudor office where she and two other well-turned-out women sit seem about as sinister as a snoozing tabby. 
But appearances can be as deceptive as that fake Remington over the fireplace. 

   "I remember the phone call we got from two FBI agents on Staten Island," the titian-haired Ms. Lowenthal continues. 
"They said, 'We have a painting of a man on horseback with some naked ladies flying behind him -- is it stolen?'" 

   FBI? 
Stolen? 
Naked women? 
All in a day's work for Ms. Lowenthal and her associates. 
The trio may look like just a couple of ladies who lunch, but don't be duped. 
These babes are crime busters, warriors in the underpersoned battle against the billion-dollar-a-year rackets of art theft and fraud. 

   They fight under the banner of the International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR), a non-profit New York-based group. 
Their major weapon: A magazine. 

   The publication, IFARreports, hits the streets 10 times a year. 
Each glossy black-and-white issue pictures 100 to 200 of the stolen artworks reported to the group by law-enforcement agencies, insurance companies and theft victims around the world (the information also is recorded in IFAR's Art Theft Archive, which has logged 28,000 objects during its decade of operation). 
Sometimes the results can be dramatic. 

   Like the time a new subscriber opened his first issue to discover the marble head he'd just received from an overseas dealer was stolen. 
Thanks to IFAR, this portrait bust of Socrates was sent back home to Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli outside Rome. 

   On other occasions, life at IFAR really does turn cloak-and-daggerish. 
"Publication of stolen art sometimes does make objects too hot to handle and things do get returned through lockers at Grand Central and anonymous phone calls," observes Ms. Lowenthal, who became IFAR's executive director in 1985 after several years in the education department of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. 

   The magazine's current issue describes how the 19th-century painter Edward Moran's "Squally Day at Newport" was recovered by a Washington gallery, in a parking lot, at night, in exchange for a lot of reward money. (About 12% of missing art eventually is retrieved, the same rate as for stolen boats.) 

   In another case, the magazine told how notes documenting a conversation between an IFAR staffer and a private eye helped lead to a Los Angeles pawnbroker's arrest for possession of a stolen Georges Roualt painting valued at a quarter-million dollars. 

   "It's really on-the-spot stuff; my husband says he's going to buy me a shoulder holster," jokes Margaret I. O'Brien, a London native who became editor of IFARreports in May after a career in advertising. 

   The third member of the IFAR triumvirate is 10-year veteran Virgilia Heimsath Pancoast, who runs the art authentication service. 
Within the past year the motherly Mrs. Pancoast, the office's dispenser of advice and Kleenex, married off a daughter and a son and also helped U.S. authorities probe the multimillion-dollar traffic in fake Dali prints. 

   This mild-mannered connoisseur provides IFARreports with some of its most lurid yarns of art thuggery and post-Holmesian detection. 
Mrs. Pancoast once aimed X-rays at a powerful painting of St. Paul attributed to the 17th-century French artist Philippe de Champaigne. 
Underneath the visible layer of paint was a completely different portrait of two figures -- in 18th-century dress. 

   IFARreports holds its 1,100 subscribers spellbound with tales of serendipity -- the man who discovered his stolen Cesare Detti odalisque listed in a Christie's sales catalog. 
And tales of woe -- the Bel Air chatelaine who one day took a good look at the picture hanging in a rarely used card room only to find that instead of her half-million-dollar impressionist oil the frame contained a high-quality photograph of the work. 

   Then there was the case of the devious dealer, a woman who exploited the art world's trust-and-a-handshake business practices. 
Until her fraud conviction, smooth-talking Claire Eatz worked an elaborate shell game. 
She'd take art from other dealers on consignment, sell it, and keep the proceeds. 
When pressed for payment Mrs. Eatz would get the pieces on consignment from the purchasers and return them to the original owners -- who no longer held title. 

   And let's not forget that painting of the gentleman and the naked ladies. 
After IFAR told the inquiring FBI agents the work was indeed hot, G-men working undercover on another case were able to retrieve it. 
The painting? 
Eugene Delacroix's "Tam O'Shanter Pursued by Witches." 

   Such major names as Delacroix surface only occasionally in IFARreports, especially in the annual issue containing the Interpol Most Wanted List (the current one includes paintings by Corot, Titian, Veronese and El Greco). 
Generally, however, thefts are skewed toward the most negotiable -- and portable -- pieces rather than the most valuable ones. 
"Anyone stealing a van Gogh is ridiculous," says editor O'Brien. 
"How ever can they expect to unload it?" 

   Judging from recent IFARreports, among the items the light-fingered particularly fancy are Oriental rugs, folk art and antique clocks, many conveniently equipped with handles. 
But thefts have lately included a second-century Roman general's sarcophagus, a 1476 Thomas Aquinas volume, and a group of antique mantels -- just about everything except the area in which IFAR director Lowenthal got her doctorate, 16th-century German sculpture ("there's not much traffic in it, licit or illicit"). 

   "With the thefts in one issue you could probably furnish a mansion," Ms. Lowenthal muses. 
"But between the Louis chairs and the prints and the ethnographic objects, it would be quite a tasteless assortment." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
