ID: 136	RANK: 47	SCORE: 6.909247
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871204-0177 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Saving the Cathedrals
---
By Nicholas Powell</HL>
<DD> 12/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Paris  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The sweetly malicious smile on the face of the angel on the facade of Reims Cathedral is the second most famous artistic grin in France. 
It is second, of course, only to that on the Mona Lisa. 
But whereas Leonardo da Vinci's smug lady behind her protective glass panel is safe from everything bar nuclear war, the smile on the angel could one day be nothing more than a postcard souvenir. 
For the pollution gnawing away at Reims and the other 86 cathedrals of France has caused more damage over the past 100 years than the monuments suffered during seven centuries or so. 

   The French government, after decades of financial neglect, has voted extra funds to help restore cathedrals. 
But the current allocation of $16 million a year is grossly insufficient to counteract the effects of atmospheric pollution, the subsiding of earth under foundations, and even damage dating back to the two World Wars. 
Budget-gobbling projects such as the Orsay Museum, the Bastille Opera and renovating the Louvre -- which alone cost almost $1 billion -- put solving the problem of the sad state of France's cathedrals into a back seat for a number of years. 
Most French people are unaware of the plight of their Romanesque and Gothic masterpieces, which are visited, free of charge, by around 100 million visitors every year. 

   Some cathedrals fare better than others. 
Chartres, for example, built in the early 13th century, is in fine health, thanks to the unusually high quality of its stone. 
But Strasbourg, built between the 11th and 14th centuries in red sandstone, has suffered from modern pollution. 
Only a quarter of the sculptures on its western facade are original. 
The Last Judgment frieze was replaced in the 1840s and the statues of the Apostles were resculpted in 1910 and again in 1983. 
The weak foundations of the northern tower were reinforced with concrete early this century, which has had the side effect of putting strain on other parts of the structure that now need to be consolidated. 

   Yves Boiret, architect in charge of 13th-century Reims Cathedral, faces two major problems. 
The first is filling in small and dangerous cracks in the northern tower, which was damaged during a World War I bombardment. 
The building caught fire and the roofing melted, sending molten lead gushing through the mouths of medieval gargoyles. 
For years the north tower was left unrepaired as a testimony to the wartime bombing, meaning that damage was aggravated with each spell of frost. 

   A more delicate task at Reims is restoring the cathedral's magnificent sculptures, which are under constant attack from humidity, atmospheric pollution and high winds. 

   Since the 1950s, when the cathedral began receiving attention, badly damaged statues have been replaced with stone copies that stand out from the rest because there is no way of artificially aging them. 
To make matters worse, the stone of Reims Cathedral is almost impossible to find in local quarries. 
Mr. Boiret is considering molding copies of statues in resinous materials covered with powdered stone. 
That leaves the question of where to store the damaged originals and whether to replace 13th-century works that are intact but that risk being eroded. 

   The Sainte Croix Cathedral of Orleans was built between 1599 and the early 19th century on the site of a previous cathedral destroyed by Protestants during the 16th-century Wars of Religion. 
Aesthetically and architecturally speaking, it is more of a curiosity than a thing of beauty, a Gothic structure built during a neoclassical period with more decorative stone swirls per pinnacle than anything built during the Middle Ages. 
Unfortunately those extravagantly pseudo-Gothic architects were so keen on being medieval that they forgot the basic masonic wisdom of putting in plenty of gutters and gargoyles to cope with rainwater. 
The Orleans cathedral is thus a sort of intricate stone sieve, continually being eaten away by rain -- a peeling, crumbling wreck built in the same creamy-colored stone as the chateaux of the Loire Valley. 

   It is an anthology of restoration problems. 
The foundations are poor. 
The stone is crumbly. 
Architects put no roofs in the western towers, leaving rain and bird droppings, which corrode stone, free to ooze down to ground level. 
Many of the stained glass windows have simply dropped out. 
The 11 chapels around the high altar have been abandoned for years -- damp, musty and littered with fallen paint work. 
A copious crop of moss lichen and grass is eating into the stonework. 
Replacement stone is hard to find. 
The clergy uses only a small part of the building for services and local people understandably tend to go to parish churches. 
Hardly any tourists visit. 

   Jacques Moulin, Orleans's architect inchief, is replacing some of the lost 19th-century stained glass by copying the original patterns. 
He also is inviting modern artists to contribute designs. 
And he is replacing stonework in the 19 flying buttresses that need repair, at the tune of $1.4 million per buttress. 
Unlike Mr. Boiret at Reims, Mr. Moulin is unwilling to use resin molding, preferring to keep France's 50 specialist sculptors in work. 
He has an annual budget of $1.25 million and could do with three times as much. 

   Neither the state nor the clergy can or will put forward so much money. 
"The money is there; it is just the will that is lacking," says Mr. Moulin. 
"That will only return when the monument is once again at the heart of public life, as it was in the Middle Ages." 

   ---
   Mr. Powell writes regularly on the arts from Paris. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
