ID: 136	RANK: 59	SCORE: 6.583428
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870602-0099 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
East Berlin Puts On a Pretty Face for 750th Birthday
---
By Amity Shlaes</HL>
<DD> 06/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP </IN>
<DATELINE> EAST BERLIN  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In East Germany, where national wealth depends heavily on hard currency from exports, there's a joke going around about the pricey restoration work here to honor Berlin's 750th anniversary. 
"Did you hear Dresden is the new capital of East Germany?" asks an East German. 
"No, what happened to Berlin?" comes the reply. 
"Well now that the government's fixed Berlin up, they've sold it to the West." 

   East Berlin has worked hard to decorate for this particular party. 
Pedestrians exhausted from the city's bleak plazas now wander off into the narrow streets of a new, quaint "old town." 
They munch wurst as they inspect the scaffolding on rising buildings in the Friedrichstrasse, which authorities hope to restore to its old role as Berlin's answer to Times Square. 
With the same zeal it once set to leveling the old Berliner Schloss and other Prussian monuments, the city is now polishing, restoring and, in many cases, "rebuilding" structures that never were. 

   The anniversary of the first mention of the old city in a 13th-century tax contract is forcing both Berlins, east and west, to reassert their claims as the German capital. 
West Berlin has upped the stakes by spending some 90 million deutsche marks (about $49.5 million) on a year-long pageant including exhibitions, theatrical events and guest performances from world leaders including Queen Elizabeth and, this month, President Reagan. 
The Western events will provide an exciting visit for anyone coming through for the birthday bash. 
But those looking for Berlin's heart will have to head east. 
The site of the original hamlet is today on the non-capitalist side of the Wall. 

   The current frenzy for historic restoration here marks a sharp about-face in what might be called the real-estate policy of the GDR. 
In the first postwar decades of socialist rule, the government applied dynamite to historic Prussian structures on a truly revolutionary scale. 
None dared call it vandalism. 
But now, after 45 years in power, the government has the confidence to attach itself to the whole past of Berlin -- and that means old buildings as well as kaisers, Kultur, churches and merchants that shaped the city before it was cut in half. 

   The centerpiece of the downtown rehabilitation is the Nikolai Quarter. 
On the war ruins of a 19th-century neighborhood there now rises an attractive, mitteleuropaisch cluster of bourgeois houses with ochre, yellow and brown facades. 
An iron pump, Prussian mailboxes, and store signs in Gothic lettering add atmosphere. 
A late rococo villa, the Ephraim Palais, has been meticulously resurrected, its wrought-iron swirling bannisters restored by craftsmen. 
The structure's balconies and pillars ended up in West German hands after the war, and were only recently acquired in a bit of cultural diplomacy between the two Berlins. 

   The entire Nikolai Quarter -- it includes 788 new "old-style" apartments -- evokes a bourgeois capital of the sort that until recently was attacked or ignored in East German official doctrine. 
But when they decide to build a Potemkin village here, they do a good job of it. 
East Germans, being Germans, are excellent craftsmen: There's a reason the East German national emblem sports a draftsman's compass instead of an orthodox Soviet sickle. 
And the government has backed the artisans in the Nikolai Quarter with "several hundred million" eastmarks. 

   At the center of the quarter is a monument exemplifying a suppressed world of freewheeling trade and Christian piety. 
The Nikolaikirche (St. Nicholas Church) rests on foundations that date back to Berlin's beginnings. 
Nicholas is patron saint of commerce, and inside the restored building a museum exhibit traces the rise of craft-oriented Berlin from the days of the Brandenburg electors. 
The interior of the church has been redone with unswerving dedication to historical accuracy, right down to brightly colored paint that may remind some visitors of modern day-care centers. 

   Outside, the church's steeples soften the city's skyline. 
The bulbous television tower that used to impose on the visitor's eye now gets gently echoed by the two new golden globes that top the Nikolai Church. 

   Less promising and far more directly tied to commerce is the rehabilitation plan for the Friedrichstrasse, the Broadway of old Berlin. 

   Hotels and shops will soon line what is now just a drab road. 
Already, a tacky, glass-walled knock-off of a Hyatt Hotel shines grimly at the north end of the street. 
Are communist planners belatedly making the same glitzy mistakes as their counterparts across the Wall? 
Or have they been spying on Chicago's State Street, where a small-scale shopping mall format has been superimposed on a wide and major boulevard. 
Some 60 restaurants are to rise in the Friedrichstrasse area. 
And frequent visitors to East Berlin will be glad to hear that the railroad station that has long been a grim gateway to the world of communism will soon lose its dingy yellow interior. 

   Indeed, much of this birthday facelift is primarily meant to charm Westerners, get them to stay longer and spend more hard currency. 
Previously, East Berlin was a day trip for tourists who would put down their heads at the border and make a dash for the Museuminsel, or museum center. 
There they could goggle at the 360 foot-long Pergamon altar, one of the wonders of Hellenistic art, brought here from Asia Minor in the 19th century. 
The standard itinerary for these cultural pilgrims allowed for a mid-afternoon break to watch East German soldiers goose step at Karl Friedrich Schinkel's spartan 19th-century Neue Wache, or New Guardhouse Building. 
Then came a lonely amble before the bronze-windowed seat of government, the Palace of the Republic. 
And that was it. 
The new restorations and resuscitated Friedrichstrasse may, it is hoped, detain tourists for another hour -- or even overnight. 

   For locals, though, Berlin won't change much. 
Although the restoration projects do give downtown East Berlin something to compare in liveliness with Budapest's graceful Vorosmarty Square or Moscow's Arbat, they fail to alter the basic fabric of communist life. 
The Nikolai Quarter, for example, sports a set of new dining accommodations, but a recent hunt for a restaurant lunch there was as depressing as ever. 
Lines spilled out into the street and around corners. 
Inns were closed unexpectedly for "technical reasons." 

   Rooms in the Palast and Metropol Hotels, East Berlin's showiest, were unavailable. 
Both establishments were closed (a week in advance) in preparation for a visit by Warsaw Pact ministers and Mikhail Gorbachev. 
Curious Berliners peeping from behind tractors at the Friedrichstrasse construction sites were ordered across the street by young policemen. 
Even looking was verboten. 

   Meanwhile, Berlin officials admit that the high cost of building Nikolai Quarterstyle apartments will prevent more such urban villages from springing up in provincial capitals such as Rostock, Schwerin or even Dresden. 
Instead, as an exhibit on East German construction here at the Dynamo Sports Complex on Ho-Chi-Minhstrasse indicates, the East Germany of the future will look much like the East Germany of the (recent) past. 
The exhibition guide, for example, boasts that each German adult is now entitled to 22.3 square yards of living space, and that the government expects to fulfill a plan to build 3.5 million homes between 1971 and 1990. 

   A lifesize Model Apartment of the Future made of glass turns on a mammoth Lazy Susan at the center of the exhibit. 
The furniture inside looks like a cheap version of budget modern in the West. 
Rent for such a dwelling, by official estimate, will remain at between 2.4% and 4% of a citizen's salary, but there's no talk of landmark preservation here. 
This Germany isn't a rich land, the guide says: The country's goal is to provide every city dweller with a pre-fab abode that's "safe, dry and warm." 

   ---
   Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
