ID: 261	RANK: 12	SCORE: 10.634284
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871026-0057 </DOCNO>
<HL> Avoiding the Economic Debacle: Comparing 1929 and 1987
---
A Look at Array of Data Shows
Some Parallels, Many Differences
---
By Alfred L. Malabre Jr.
                                                 </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<IN> TAXES FORGN
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Much has been made of the worrisome similarities between economic circumstances now and at the onset of the Great Depression -- from the crashing stock market to the soothing reassurances from Washington about the essential soundness of business activity. 

   But less attention has been paid to a related matter of far greater importance: What lessons do the parallels provide for avoiding the economic debacle that followed the crash of 1929? 

   There are some obvious ones -- particularly for makers of monetary policy and trade bargainers. 
But on the whole, it is difficult to find many easy lessons buried in the years surrounding the crash of 1929. 
Private debt may have been high, just as it is now, for instance, but trade and the federal budget showed a surplus back then, and exchange rates were largely fixed in relation to one another. 

   Clearly, then, 1929 can't be seen as just a case history of what not to do. 
But at the least, it provides some fascinating clues for those trying to put the puzzle of 1987 into better focus. 
What follows are some of the economic similarities and differences between now and 1929. 

   MONEY SUPPLY
   In 1929, as the top chart shows, the nation's money supply, broadly defined to include certain savings-type deposits, was flattening out after sustained growth earlier in the decade (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 26, 1987). 
And, in the early 1930s, the measure fell sharply, as did general economic activity. 

   The monetary contraction predated the establishment early in the New Deal of such institutions as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, so that when banks failed in the early 1930s the money supply tended to shrink as uninsured deposits were wiped out. 

   There has been no such monetary shrinkage recently, nor is there likely to be with today's widespread deposit insurance. 
But there has been a distinct slowing in monetary growth and, at least until last Monday, some calls for a still tighter monetary policy, as a way to try to bolster the dollar's sagging international value. 

   TRADE
   On the trade front, protectionism mounted in the wake of the 1929 crash, and this led to the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, passed in 1930. 
The legislation, which increased import duties in such major industries as minerals, chemicals and textiles, is widely blamed, in retrospect, for helping to turn a severe recession into something far worse. 
Within two years, some two dozen countries had established retaliatory tariffs, and world trade shriveled. 

   No such extreme legislation is on the books now and world trade continues to expand, albeit slowly. 
But protectionist trade bills are wending their way through Congress and some politicians have declared last Monday's crash an additional reason to raise import barriers. 

   PRIVATE DEBT
   As the second-from-top chart shows, the role of private debt rose steadily in the 1920s and early 1930s, before shrinking later in the Great Depression, and there has been a remarkably similar increase in recent years. 
Rules for buying stock on credit were far looser then, but debt looms larger today in areas ranging from credit cards to student loans. 
Generally, interest rates, though on the rise, were lower in 1929 than now, and the consumer price index, most enviably, was at about the same level in 1929 as 10 years earlier. 

   SAVINGS AND SPENDING
   Savings were relatively low in 1929, amounting to less than 4% of after-tax income, which is close to recent levels. 
Wealth and income grew more concentrated as the 1929 crash approached; various estimates suggest this pattern has recurred of late. 

   A disquieting footnote: stock ownership is more widespread now, with about 20% of the population holding shares, compared to about 1% in 1929. 
On the other hand, dividend payments constituted some 7% of all personal income in 1929, while now they make up less than 3%. 

   In 1929, as now, consumer outlays dominated the business scene, accounting for about two-thirds of economic activity, which is near the present rate. 
And expenditures for various services, from housing to health care -- deemed less vulnerable than other sorts of spending when times go bad -- amounted to about 30% of all economic activity in 1929, which is roughly the rate nowadays. 
Today, however, a far larger fraction of the work force holds service jobs. 

   THE TWIN DEFICITS
   The nation's towering twin deficits -- in the federal budget and foreign trade -- are major concerns of policy makers at present. 
The prevailing view is that each must be reduced quickly and sharply to strengthen the nation's economic underpinnings. 
And this would seem to suggest a need for more restrictive fiscal measures -- higher taxes and reduced federal spending -- to pare further an already shrinking budget shortfall. 
It would further suggest keeping the dollar's value sufficiently low to help improve America's competitive position. 

   However, as the lower two charts indicate, the period surrounding the 1929 crash throws up more questions here for policy makers than answers. 
In 1929, the federal budget was in surplus -- by $1.2 billion in an economy less than a fifth the size of today's. 
Then, as now, government spending was on the rise but accounted for far less of overall economic activity. 

   Also in contrast to the recent pattern, total government debt in 1929 was on the decline. 
At $30.1 billion, the debt level had fallen almost without interruption since early in the decade. 
It rose sharply only later -- as the 1930s unfolded and the nation began to pull out of the Great Depression with the approach of World War II. 

   A similar disparity exists in foreign trade. 
In contrast to today's deep trade deficit, which could well exceed $150 billion for the full year, trade in goods and services was in surplus by more than $1.1 billion in 1929. 

   In fact, the trade account was in surplus throughout the 1920s, reaching a high of some $3.5 billion early in the decade, and trade remained in surplus, though at somewhat reduced levels, throughout the 1930s. 
By no coincidence, the U.S. was a creditor nation throughout those years, while now it is the largest international debtor. 

   If there is any lesson in such data, it may be that budget and trade deficits, however much they may account for economic difficulties in the U.S. now, can hardly be held responsible for the trouble that engulfed business after the 1929 crash. 
The only message, perhaps, is that deficits in the budget and in trade are by no means the only precursors of economic collapse and, by the same token, eliminating them clearly doesn't guarantee smooth sailing. 

   With regard to cutting budgetary red ink through higher taxes -- a strategy widely advocated now -- it is disconcerting to recall that taxes were repeatedly raised in the 1930s, as the budget slid from surplus into deeper and deeper deficit. 
This was on the heels of repeated tax reductions in the 1920s. 

   ECONOMIC GROWTH
   When the market crashed in 1929, the economy was already turning down, after reaching a business-cycle peak in August of that year. 
When the latest crash occurred, in contrast, the economy by most estimates was clearly on the rise. 
It is too early to know whether this is still the case. 
But an expanding economy can perhaps withstand such financial blows better than one already beginning to turn down. 

   EXCHANGE RATES
   Dissimilarities pervade the international monetary front as well. 
Today's international arrangement of relatively free-floating foreign-exchange rates is widely seen as a source of economic instability -- and many advocate establishing a system of currency rates more rigidly fixed between the major nations. 

   But it's worth noting that during the earlier crash international exchange rates were in large measure fixed. 
And, by some accounts at least, the old fixed-rate system tended to deepen rather than alleviate the slump that followed the 1929 crash. 

   This comes clear in an out-of-print volume entitled "International Currency Experiences -- Lessons of the Inter-War Period," written more than four decades ago by the late Ragnar Nurkse, an economist for the old League of Nations. 
In country after country, he recalled, a resumption of economic growth followed on the heels of a particular currency's "collapse" -- that is, its departure from some previous fixed rate of exchange with gold or other currency linked to gold. 

   The pound sterling, for example, collapsed in September 1931, when Britain after huge gold losses stopped selling gold for pounds at a set price. 
Just before the floating of the pound, Britain's industrial production production index stood at 80% of its 1924 base of 100, down from a 1929 high of 113%. 
After September 1931, the index began to rise slowly, to 88% by year's end, to 90% in early 1932, all the way up 127% by mid-decade. 

   The experience of France was similar, but with a highly significant difference as to timing. 
French currency was among the last to be set free from a fixed link with gold, in late 1936, and the French economy didn't begin to pull out of the depression until about 1938. 
In the U.S., the currency collapse came in early 1933, and a similar pattern of gradual employment and production recovery soon ensued. 

   Mr. Nurkse's conclusion from such trends was, essentially, that as each currency came unstuck this "was followed by a domestic expansion of investment and national income." 
Nowadays, of course, the U.S. economy plays a far larger global role, so that it becomes more difficult for other nations to insulate themselves from the fortunes of the dollar or American business. 

   THIRD-WORLD DEBT
   A troubling dissimilarity between 1929 and now involves the huge, lagely unservicable debt burden of Third World nations. 
Such nations were in deep financial trouble then, too, and several in South America failed to service loans. 

   But today there are so many more developing nations, and so the problem seems greater. 
Much of today's Third World was merely a colonial adjunct of industrial Europe in 1929, not independent governments -- poor, with mismanaged economies, polically fragile, saddled with failed industrialization programs and, of course, enormous debt. 

   ECONOMIC DATA
   It is encouraging to note, in this connection, that today's policy makers have available a far greater and more timely assortment of data bearing on the economy's health. 
When the market crashed in 29, information on such matters as inventory levels and joblessness was compiled long after the fact and sporadically, if at all. 

   Now, with Washington's statistics mills able to spin out such information and much more on at least a monthly basis, policy makers no long must fly blind. 
Whether they will make good use of such statistical radar, however, is an open question. 

   (See related story: "Dow's Movements Last Week Mirrored Market 58 Years Ago" -- WSJ Oct. 26, 1987) 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
