ID: 261	RANK: 14	SCORE: 10.267047
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871020-0006 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Crash of '87:
Stocks Plunge 508.32
Amid Panicky Selling
---
A Repeat of '29?
Depression in '87
Is Not Expected
---
Banking System Safeguards
And Federal Mechanisms
Are Viewed as Adeqaute
---
By Kenneth H. Bacon
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/20/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Can it happen again? 

   On Oct. 28, 1929, the stock market fell 12.8%, ushering in the Great Depression. 
While the market plunged 22.6% yesterday, economists generally don't expect another depression. 

   "I don't think the economy looks like it did in 1929," says George Stigler, the winner of the 1982 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics and a University of Chicago economics professor. 
"The most violent and urgent of factors in the great crash was the collapse of the banking system. 
That can't happen anymore because of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp." and additional safeguards. 

   Mr. Stigler, like other economists, stresses that today's financial system and economic policy mechanisms provide considerably more protection against the type of cascading economic collapse that crippled the nation during the Depression, which lasted from 1929 to 1933. 
During that period, the value of the nation's output contracted by more than 50%, and unemployment rates rose to nearly 25%. 

   The fundamental difference between today and 1929, Mr. Stigler says, is that "you won't get the pyramiding effect" that cracked the financial system in 1929. 
Today, deposit insurance covers bank accounts of up to $100,000. 
Moreover, banking and securities laws passed in the 1930s have sharply reduced financial risk by building walls between commercial banks and brokers and by limiting how much an investor can borrow to buy stocks. 

   As a result, the nation has created a banking system that is much safer than the securities markets, which are subject to greater risk and to speculative excesses, says Barry Bosworth, an economist at the Brookings Institution. 

   Today, under the Federal Reserve Board's margin rules, buyers can borrow only 50% of the value of the shares they buy. 
In 1929, they could borrow up to 78%. 
"By 1929, a full 40% of all investors were margin buyers, many of whom pyramided their paper profits, accumulating hundreds of thousands of dollars in profit on comparatively minuscule investments," the Securities and Exchange Commission noted in its 50th anniversary publication in 1984. 
Today, less than 10% of all securities customers are said to use margin debt. 
Although the market's decline is indeed forcing investors to sell shares to meet margin calls today, the financial system's safety margin is much greater because the margin rules are tighter. 

   "The difference between today and 1929 is that, clearly, there are an enormous number of safety nets in place today," says David Ruder, the chairman of the SEC. 
He notes that "1929 was a long series of declines. 
This isn't, so far." 

   Of course, the sharpness of yesterday's decline is taking the stock markets -- and the nation itself -- into uncharted territory. 
Nobody knows how the sudden loss of wealth -- about $500 billion yesterday alone, Mr. Bosworth estimates -- will change the nation's confidence and buying habits. 
Nobody knows whether yesterday's plunge is the end of a correction in the greatest bull market in history or just part of a downward spiral. 

   The Federal Reserve Board holds some of the answers to these questions. 
In 1929, there was "gross mismanagement by the Federal Reserve," Mr. Stigler notes. 
As the nation slipped into depression, the Fed slowed money-supply growth, thus choking off credit at exactly the time when the country needed more liquidity. 
The Fed steadfastly resisted pleas from President Hoover for faster monetary growth. 
"That's not happening today," Mr. Stigler says, "though I don't put aside the prospect of error at the present time, either." 

   Recently, the Fed has been resisting pressure from abroad and from the financial markets to increase interest rates. 
In general, the Fed has far greater flexibility than it had in 1929 to use monetary policy to influence the economy. 
However, an event as sudden and shocking as yesterday's decline can reduce the Fed's margin of error, particularly at a time when the U.S. is highly dependent on attracting foreign capital to finance its budget and trade deficits. 

   "One of the reasons the banking system collapsed between 1929 and 1933 was Federal Reserve policy," notes Benjamin Friedman, a Harvard economics professor. 
He says it is crucial for the Fed to do what it can to help keep the economy out of recession. 
"If there's a recession, a lot of business borrowers will be in trouble," Mr. Friedman warns. 
Heavy corporate borrowing has driven up corporate interest payments and made many corporations more vulnerable to a downturn in sales, he explains. 

   In many respects, the stock market plunge has come at a strange time. 
The economy is enjoying the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. history, and -- before the market collapse, at least -- most business economists expected the recovery to continue into 1989. 
Inflation is moderate, unemployment is down, the budget deficit is shrinking and the dollar has been relatively stable after a rapid decline early in the year. 

   Given these conditions, the stock market seems out of step with the real economy, Mr. Stigler suggests. 
He concedes that the stock market can be a leading indicator of the economy, but he stresses that it has given "hundreds of false signals" over the years. 
Moreover, the extreme volatility of today's market, he says, indicates that it "is dominated by panic. 
Panic is a good predictor of what's going to happen in the next half hour, not the next half year." 

   Most economic indicators point to continued growth rather than to recession, Mr. Stigler says, noting that corporate profits and employment look good. 
While the budget and trade deficits are worrisome for the long run, their relevance for the short run "are greatly exaggerated," he believes. 
If investors are so worried about the deficit, he asks, "What explains the last five years" when the market soared as the deficit swelled? 

   Much depends on whether the stock market fall continues and how it echoes through the economy. 
"A very interesting thing to watch is whether this decline will be limited to stocks or (whether it) will spread to other assets" such as housing and land, commodities and other investments, Mr. Friedman says. 
Yesterday, prices of commodities and bonds rose, suggesting that the sense of panic may be limited to the stock market. 

   In addition, the dollar rose sharply late yesterday. 
"Everybody pulled out from the stock market, but I don't see that spreading into serious international problems," says Mr. Bosworth. 

   In the end, U.S. consumers hold the key to the economy's performance. 
Personal-consumption spending accounts for about two-thirds of gross national product, the total output of U.S. goods and services. 

   David Wyss, the senior vice president at Data Resources Inc. in Lexington, Mass., says that the huge reduction in stockholders' assets "causes a real risk that consumers are going to retrench. 
There are storm clouds on the horizon. 
The consumer has been carrying the economy for the past year and a half. 
If he pulls back, that probably means a recession next year." 

   Mr. Wyss says he doesn't expect a downturn, although "the odds are rising. 
If the world's central banks stay tight and the market stays down, we've got a recession." 

   "I'm scared," says Mr. Wyss of the stock market plunge, "but there are great bargains out there." 
He doesn't think the drop will be permanent. 
"If the market gets back to 2,100-2,200 level and we get some loosening by the central banks, we can avoid the recession." 

   Mr. Bosworth says that even if the Dow Jones Industrial Average stays at about its current level, the loss of wealth from yesterday's collapse will reduce 1988 GNP by only "several tenths of a percentage point" from what it would otherwise be. 

   If the economy does turn sharply downward, changes in government policies and protections instituted since the Great Depression will offer the best defense against another one. 
Total government purchases of goods and services have risen to about 20% of GNP, from 8.6% in 1929, thus providing considerable economic momentum. 

   In addition, a host of government income-maintenance programs -- social security, unemployment, and welfare benefits -- help support spending levels. 

   Monetary and fiscal policy tools have been refined, and -- unlike the more timid days before Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal -- administrations of both parties have shown that they are prepared to work actively to avoid economic calamity. 
Indeed, the Great Depression taught the U.S. that the best way to deal with economic collapse is to prevent one from happening. 

   (See Related story: "Percentage Decline Is Far Steeper Than '29; Precious Metals Gain" -- WSJ Oct. 20, 1987) 

   ---
   Rose Gutfeld and Thomas E. Ricks contributed to this article 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
