ID: 261	RANK: 15	SCORE: 10.265569
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871217-0115 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor:
The Crashes of '29 and '87</HL>
<DD> 12/17/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The Journal's coverage of the "Crash of 1987" has been the most complete of any major publication; not only did you paint the near disintegration of the stock market in hues that befit a detective (and horror) movie, the editorial-page piece by Robert L. Bartley, "1929 and All That" (Nov. 24), was a first-rate comparative essay. 

   As we sit licking our wounds, it is heartening to be reminded that the losses suffered in the fall are what, until "tax reform," would have been classified as short term. 
That is, today's Dow Jones Industrial Average is within a few points of where it began the year. 
Alas, however, the carnage would have been worse were the universe expanded to include the Over-the-Counter Market. 

   Almost ignored, however, has been the fact that for foreign investors, the situation deteriorates further because of the erosion of the dollar in relation to their specific currency. 
Thus, for instance, for the Japanese investor to have made a profit, he would have had to invest in the Dow Jones Industrials during the period it was below 1000 -- that is in the years between 1977 and 1982. 
After that, the dollar lost value in relation to the yen faster than the DJIA appreciated. 
The situation is similar, but not quite as disastrous for investors from other countries. 
The German investor could have waited until March 1983; after that he too would have lost money. 
Please note that these calculations don't take into consideration dividends or any type of portfolio insurance. 
Thus in real or world-wide terms, not only has the U.S. suffered a crash, using the yen and deutsche mark as bench marks, it never enjoyed the prosperity beforehand. 

   Theodore P. Kovaleff
   Assistant Dean, School of Law
   Columbia University New York
   ---
   Mr. Bartley's article is the clearest and best written piece I have ever read on the 1929 crash. 
The parallels with our current situation seem so obvious. 
I am surprised our politicians have never learned you can't legislate the basic tenets of a free market. 
I only hope some at least have read your article and aren't so pompous that they can't see what is before their very noses. 
I hope they just leave the participants of the capital markets to set their own values. 
That is the definition of a free marketplace, isn't it? 

   John S. Sturges
   Vice President, Financial Consultant
   Shearson Lehman Brothers
   Albany, N.Y.
   ---
   Mr. Bartley's interesting article would have been more instructive if he had included an account of monetary policy, both then and now. 
By omission, he implies that Federal Reserve policy, which shrank the money supply by one-third, had nothing to do with the Great Depression, but only reflected a decline in trade. 
In other words, as the Keynesians used to say, money doesn't matter. 

   As for our own times, he apparently believes that monetary policy is useful in fighting inflation and supporting the dollar, but that these activities are unrelated to the size of the budget deficit, interest rates and the stock-market crash. 
It would be wonderful if we could use monetary policy to cure inflation without enlarging the deficit and support the dollar without raising interest rates. 
If Bob Bartley knows how to do this, he should promptly be made Federal Reserve chairman. 

   Paul Craig Roberts
   Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies 

   Georgetown University
   Washington
   ---
   Mr. Bartley's most interesting article makes an ardent plea for avoiding the sorts of mistakes that resulted in the Great Depression of the 1930s. 
He is especially impassioned about not "closing the trade account," as we did with the Smoot-Hawley Tariff in 1931. 

   What Mr. Bartley does not tell us, however, is how we can possibly bring world trade into a more balanced condition without going through a wrenching period of readjustment -- a period in which a major decline in the level of trade, with all its negative implications, is highly likely. 

   The major surplus countries, after all, can maintain their large export positions while trade is becoming more balanced only if their own imports rise prodigiously. 
And that is not apt to happen. 
Neither their macroeconomic policies nor the tastes and preferences of their peoples will permit it. 
The former, of course, could be made much more stimulative, as Mr. Bartley and many others are advocating. 
And eliminating remaining trade barriers would also help. 
When beef can be bought in New York for $4 a pound, it should not cost nearly five times that much in Tokyo. 

   But more stimulative macroeconomic policies and fewer trade barriers will not eliminate the current trade imbalances, at least not unless the appetite for imported goods in the major surplus countries grows in very improbable ways. 
The Japanese, in particular, seem to have a very low income and price elasticity of demand for imports; they simply prefer to purchase things made at home. 

   Once it is recognized that there is no easy way to achieve a better balance of trade by stimulating imports in the surplus countries, it becomes apparent that such a balance will almost certainly require a somewhat lower overall level of trade, at least for a period of adjustment. 
It is imperative, of course, that we try to manage things in such a way that anything approaching a depression is avoided. 
But let's not put off taking the medicine in the belief that some magic cure-all can be found. 

   Simply put, both America's consumers and the producers in the major surplus nations have been living in a fool's paradise. 
The former have been spending like drunken sailors; the latter have been profiting from America's profligateness. 
Both need to understand that even with the best of economic policies in their respective countries, the next few years are likely to be ones in which some painful retrenching is probably in order. 

   Richard R. West
   Dean, Graduate School of Business Administration 

   New York University
   New York
   ---
   For those who maintain a simplistic cause-and-effect relationship between the stock-market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression, Mr. Bartley's article should have been an awakening. 
Before the crash and the Depression there were a number of economic and political decisions that undermined the self-correcting nature of the market and paralyzed world trade. 
The signing of the Smoot-Hawley tariff bill is an important lesson in international political economy, and it is one demonstration of how the web of interconnected relationships that make up a world economy can be dismantled by protectionism and faulty monetary policy. 

   It is invaluable to examine the history behind the Depression to facilitate wise policy making and to diminish the superficial impressions that are embedded in our collective mind. 

   Kathleen Dragoo
   Kent, Wash.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
