ID: 261	RANK: 16	SCORE: 10.182365
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881019-0019 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Black Monday Revisited </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> STK SCR FRX ECO </IN>
<TEXT>
   Somehow the Second Great Depression failed to arrive on schedule. 
On the anniversary of Black Monday, the economy is humming along in the 71st month of a record expansion. 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average has recovered some 400 of the 500 points it lost last October 19 -- though of course before that it had also dropped nearly 500 points from its all-time high two months earlier. 

   The key to understanding these events is that the stock market does not move the economy, it anticipates the economy. 
A stock-market nose dive certainly means something is starting to go wrong, but sometimes the worst fears do not come true. 
If the anticipated threat is averted in time, ill effects in the real economy can be avoided. 
The classic case is the 1962 bear market; when the market fell 26% in three months, the Kennedy Administration got the message and stopped picking fights with steel companies. 
The market recovered, the Kennedy tax cuts were passed and the economy staged one of its most impressive advances ever. 

   In the 1987 collapse, most of the analysis has focused on internal market mechanics. 
It's obviously an important question whether Black Monday showed market-mechanism defects that need correction. 
Examining this was the Brady Commission's charter, and some reform has followed. 
Even without legislation or regulation, market participants learned that portfolio insurance did not work. 
The big danger of total breakdown came on October 20, as detailed in the Pulitzer-prize winning report by our James Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg. 
The October 20 problem was that no one in the market knew whether a potential trading partner was a credit risk, and clearing mechanisms have been improved to reduce this uncertainty. 

   As important as these lessons are, though, internal mechanics has never been a satisfying explanation of the crash. 
In particular, on Black Monday markets crashed all around the world. 
Markets crashed whether or not they had program trading, regardless of how extensively they were computerized, whether or not they had stock index futures. 
Or for that matter, whether or not they were located within geographical frontiers where trade deficits or surpluses were recorded. 
Conceivably the world-wide plunge was merely a "billboard effect" from the New York collapse, but this explanation seems lame. 
We believe that something far more fundamental was being recorded. 

   The October 19 crash, it seemed to us then and even more now, was one of the agonies of trying to manage an instantaneously interdependent world economy. 
The computers and communications of the information revolution have created one world marketplace in which national boundaries are anachronistic, but the world's tools of government have not kept pace. 
In this disjunction lies the biggest chance of economic catastrophe. 

   Indeed, this was true even in 1929. 
The international flow of funds was already threatened by the collapse in international lending in 1928, and the market crash was a warning that political events were about to close trade flows as well. 
The market recovered as it seemed the Smoot-Hawley tariff might yet be defeated or vetoed, but in the end the market's warning was not heeded. 
When the trade-closing tariff was signed, an ordinary business correction turned into the Great Depression. 
The prosperity following World War II was in turn fostered by the formation of great institutions of international economic integration -- the Bretton Woods monetary system, the IMF and World Bank, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 

   By 1987 the world economy had become even more integrated. 
But Bretton Woods had collapsed into a system of floating exchange rates. 
The rates seemed far more volatile than advocates of floating had anticipated, and their fluctuations disrupted the price signals that channel goods and investment to their most profitable uses. 
The seemingly capricious destruction of profits, investments and jobs fed a protectionism once again rearing its political head around the world. 

   Still, in 1986 and early 1987, the protectionist threat was more or less being contained. 
More promising still, the developed world's finance ministers seemed on course toward greater cooperation. 
They had agreed at the Plaza meeting in September 1985 that exchange rates needed to be stabilized, and that the dollar was too high. 
At the Louvre meeting in February 1987, they agreed that the depreciation of the dollar had gone too far. 
In this international economic atmosphere, stock markets boomed. 

   By mid-1987, this cooperation was under growing strain. 
The U.S. Treasury and the Bundesbank were inching toward collision, in effect arguing over whether the dollar was too low or the mark too high. 
As the argument developed, the markets topped out. 
October 19 came the day after the argument turned into open confrontation with Treasury Secretary Baker's televised remarks. 
We believe Mr. Baker was right and the Germans were wrong, but he seemed to suggest that to prevail he would let the dollar plunge. 
We think the threat the market saw was a dollar collapse, the severing of international cooperation and the victory of protectionism around the world. 
This is indeed a prescription for a new depression. 

   In the event, this danger was averted. 
After recovering part of its loss in the first few days after October 19, the market sputtered out the year with a persisting sense of crisis. 
In the first week of January, the world central banks intervened massively to support the dollar, and backed up the interventions with adjustments in basic monetary policy. 
The Treasury-Bundesbank rift was obviously resolved, and international cooperation restored. 
The sense of crisis dissipated and the market started the gradual climb to its current levels. 

   Can October 19 happen again? 
Sure, if rifts again sunder international economic management, and particularly if protectionism starts to win in the U.S. and elsewhere. 
Can the market climb back to 2700 and beyond? 
Sure, if protectionism is defeated and international cooperation continues to move toward greater exchange-rate stability, maybe even toward the restoration of something resembling Bretton Woods. 

   ---

               Dow Jones Industrial Average
             (Closing prices, decimals dropped)
              December 31, 1986       1895
              August 25, 1987         2722
              October 16, 1987        2246
              October 19, 1987        1738
              October 23, 1987        1950
              December 31, 1987       1938
              October 18, 1988        2159

</TEXT>
</DOC>
