ID: 261	RANK: 17	SCORE: 10.168008
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871124-0065 </DOCNO>
<HL> 1929 and All That
---
By Robert L. Bartley</HL>
<DD> 11/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Back in 1985, moved by a sense that the world economy was sailing troubled waters, I spent the summer reading a stack of books about the Great Depression. 
Though inflation had been conquered and economic recovery was well under way, the outlook was marred by such portents as the Third World debt problem, curiously high interest rates, complaints about an overvalued dollar and especially a rebirth of protectionism. 
Were we skirting the edge of some huge crackup? 

   Two years ago, it developed, the 1920s exhibited many parallels with the 1980s: a booming stock market, a strong economy sparked by tax cuts, a countercurrent in agricultural distress, exchange-rate disruptions, an international debt crisis -- the "war debts." 
The history of the Great Depression may reveal mistakes that can be avoided a second time -- see "Toying with Depression" in this space Sept. 5, 1985. 
After the stock market crash of '87, of course, the parallels, and the need for understanding, seem all the more pressing. 

   Understanding begins with the obvious: The Great Depression was an international event. 
Anyone perusing a wide sample of the literature is likely to be drawn away from the competing domestic explanations, finding more satisfaction in the writers who focus on the international accounts. 
Their explanation of the depth and severity of the Depression is this: The U.S. blocked the world economy by closing down its international accounts. 
The capital account closed in 1928, with an abrupt end to the U.S. lending that had sustained Germany and South America. 
The trade account closed in 1930, with the Smoot-Hawley tariff. 

   Unable either to borrow or sell in the U.S., other nations could not buy in the U.S. 
Many nations of course passed retaliatory tariffs. 
Many also engaged in competitive devaluations, hoping to improve exports through a cheaper currency; these became known as "beggar-thy-neighbor" policies. 
World trade imploded, as Charles Kindleberger's nearby chart shows so graphically (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Nov. 24, 1987). 
Each nation found that without the interdependent links with international trade and capital, prosperity could no longer continue. 
The Great Depression, in short, was caused by massive interruptions of international flows of trade and capital. 

   It follows that the Great Depression was not caused by the 1929 stock market crash. 
Popular mythology holds that the market boomed until Black Thursday and then collapsed to nothing, sending brokers jumping out of windows and unemployment leaping to 20% the next day. 
It did not happen that way at all. 
What the stock market did was trace economic and political events as they unfolded. 

   On Sept. 3, 1929, the Dow Jones Industrials reached 381, a high not seen again for a quarter-century. 
On that day Congress returned from its summer recess to its task of debating the tariff. 
The market started to slide, unexceptionally until Oct. 24, Black Thursday. 
On that morning the market collapsed. 
At their low for the day, the Dow Jones Industrials were off 33 points, but for many stocks there seemed no buyers. 
The stock tape fell hopelessly behind, and exchanges outside of New York closed. 
Eleven prominent speculators indeed committed suicide. 
But in the afternoon, heads of large New York banks organized market support and quelled the plunge. 
The Dow finished Black Thursday down six. 
The papers that morning, Jude Wanniski has observed, had announced the breakup of the coalition against the tariff -- making clear it would be extended beyond agricultural products. 

   The Great Crash came the next Monday and Tuesday. 
Over the two days the Dow fell from 298 to 230. 
The average zig-zagged down further to hit the 1929 low of 198 on Nov. 13. 
Then came "the suckers' rally," which by April 1930 had carried the average back to 294, nearly wiping out the crash. 
Opposition to the tariff had been rising, but started to ebb. 
On June 14, 1930, just before President Hoover finally announced he would sign the bill, the Dow stood at 244. 
When the 30-stock average was first drawn up on Oct. 1, 1928, it had stood at 240. 
All that had happened was the loss of the big bull market in 1929; stocks remained at levels previously considered not only healthy but high, until the tariff went into effect. 

   Over the next two years, the average fell from 244 to 41. 

   The reasons for the real collapse are evident in Prof. Kindleberger's chart; trade closed and prosperity set. 
The stock market did not cause, it reflected. 
In an important sense, it anticipated. 
The individual decisions of myriad investors added up to a collective warning that errors were in the process of being made. 
The Great Crash gave timely warning, when there was still time to change course and avert the brink. 
If President Hoover had heeded the advice offered in a petition by 1,028 economists, had vetoed Smoot-Hawley, the Great Depression would in all likelihood have been an ordinary business correction despite the stock market crash. 

   Since World War II, indeed, only about half of sharp stock market declines have been followed by recessions. 
In the other half, policy makers got the message. 
The most notable example is 1962, the nearest thing to a crash between 1929 and 1987. 
The Dow Jones Industrials fell 26% in three months, compared with 48% in 2 1/2 months in 1929. 
So 1962 was about half of a Great Crash, but nothing happened in the real economy. 
All that happened was that the Kennedy administration was smart enough to stop picking fights with steel companies. 
The generalized anti-business atmosphere the markets had started to anticipate did not materialize. 
Stocks started to recover, and the real economy marched on unhindered. 
Indeed, with the 1964 tax cuts, it entered one of its best periods of the century. 

   Which, of course, brings us to 1987. 
From the high of 2722 on Aug. 25 to the low of 1738 on Oct. 19, stocks fell 36%. 
We have just experienced a market crash halfway between 1929, which ushered in a depression, and 1962, which did nothing. 
The question is not, is depression inevitable? 
The question is, what is the market trying to tell us? 

   There are two general theories of the stock market. 
One is called "efficient markets," which holds that the collective action of individuals neatly incorporates information about future prospects, so that a rise in the markets means something good has happened, and a fall something bad. 
The other is called "popular delusions and the madness of crowds," which holds that the market is an untamed beast. 
Those of us who hold with efficient markets have to recognize that the crowd psychology folks often make a lot of money playing the market; their view should not be too lightly dismissed. 
We can pretty safely dismiss, though, the folks who believe in crowd psychology when the market contradicts their analysis, and efficient markets when it confirms their analysis. 

   This includes the whole twin-deficits crowd, who have been screaming that the market was wrong all during its ascent, and are now breaking arms patting themselves on the back because the market has proved them right. 
It would of course be nice to balance the federal deficit at some stable level of taxing and spending, but in recent months the news has been that the deficit is shrinking, not growing. 
The U.S. trade deficit is scarcely a sign of health for the world economy, but do we really want to close it with another Smoot-Hawley? 
We have already closed the capital account, with a precipitous drop in bank lending to the Third World; the trade deficit means we are at least keeping one account open. 

   In any event, the popular twin-deficits explanation of the crash suffers two embarrassments. 
It is unable to explain how the Dow ever got to 2700 to begin with. 
More tellingly, it cannot in itself explain why stocks collapsed in countries with trade surpluses and insignificant internal deficits. 
As of last week stocks were off from their highs by 29% in the U.S., 40% in West Germany and 31% in Switzerland. 
Like the 1929 Depression, the 1987 market crash was an international event. 

   What, then, was starting to happen in mid-October? 
The real economy was picking up. 
Interest rates were rising somewhat, with higher demand for funds and renewed fears of inflation. 
The U.S. trade deficit came in higher than expected, but it too had been around all through the market boom. 
The Reagan administration was increasingly beleaguered, as the Iran-Contra hearings were followed by the Bork defeat and various congressional efforts to take over foreign policy; the administration clearly had less power to battle protectionism or hold its own in tax and budget confrontations. 

   These trends developed during October, but the one clearly new thing was a set of proposals in Rep. Dan Rostenkowski's Ways and Means Committee. 
Without much advance warning, it concocted a bill that in general was anti-business and antiwealth, and in particular calculated to stop the company takeovers that had boosted the stock market. 
The provision to disallow interest deductions for any significant takeover borrowing was stuck in the bill with 15 minutes of discussion and made retroactive to Oct. 13. 
The risk arbitrage community collapsed overnight, and the decline in takeover stocks was followed by the general market debacle on the 19th. 

   Even given the importance of the U.S. in the world economy, though, the quickly disavowed tax proposals fail to explain the international character of the market crash. 
In terms of the international economy, the big new event in mid-October was the argument between the Bundesbank and Treasury Secretary James Baker. 
The Germans insisted on tightening monetary policy though the mark was strong, and Secretary Baker's criticism was increasingly strident. 
On the day before the Monday crash, he denied reports that the U.S. was seeking a lower dollar but warned, "We will not sit back in this country and watch surplus countries jack up their interst rates and squeeze growth world-wide on the expectation that the United States somehow will follow by raising its interest rates." 

   In mid-October, the Louvre agreement on exchange-rate stability was, if not broken, clearly foundering. 
Exchange-rate stability must be maintained through monetary policy. 
If two currencies diverge too much, the central banks must create more of the strong currency or less of the weak one. 
Which bank is to make the adjustment depends on some judgment about whether the world system needs more liquidity to promote growth or less liquidity to fight inflation. 
In the lack of some outside guidepost, the Bundesbank and the Treasury had come to different conclusions; each wanted the other to adjust. 

   In his criticism of the Bundesbank, Secretary Baker was clearly right. 
The currency markets were demanding more marks, and this demand should have been satisfied. 
Stifling it would hamper growth in Germany and break up the Louvre accord. 
The problem for the Treasury, and for that matter Germany's partners in the European Monetary System, was how to persuade the Bundesbank without a fixed guidepost to invoke. 

   Imaginative options might have been to try to fix the dollar-franc rate, to announce a policy of defending the dollar against gold, or to flesh out Secretary Baker's recent remarks about a commodity index. 
These approaches might not have saved the initial Louvre rates, but at least they would have made clear that the problem is an appreciating mark. 
But it's dangerous to suggest trying to punish the Germans by threatening to let the dollar fall. 
If U.S. officials actively want a lower dollar, the markets will start to anticipate them. 
In precisely this scenario, it seems to me, lies the most likely son-of-Smoot-Hawley, the most likely way international trade and capital flows can again be disrupted. 

   Outright protectionism still remains a threat, especially with Reagan administration officials beating up on Japan, Brazil, Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea and even Hong Kong. 
But at least the Gephardt trade bill is widely seen as intellectually discredited and politically unlikely. 
Beggar-thy-neighbor, though, is flourishing. 
Eminent economists, Treasury officials and even the Federal Reserve chairman talk about a lower dollar, either advocating it or predicting it on the assumption the dollar will decline until it makes trade flows balance. 
In short, devaluation for competitive purposes. 

   These eminences, to be sure, always attach one qualification: The decline of the dollar must be "gradual." 
Now, a gradual devaluation will not be catastrophic; inflation rates in the two nations will offset the change in currencies, and the real economy will be unaffected. 
By the same token, of course, it will not help the much-discussed trade balance, any more than it did in the last two years. 
Nor has competitive devaluation ever worked for any of the myriad nations that have tried it throughout the world. 
The usual outcome of gradual devaluation is sudden devaluation. 

   What if the dollar has its own Black Monday? 
What if it falls 25% in a day, as the Mexican peso did last week? 
Mexico had followed a policy of daily devaluations of the peso, until its central bank suddenly stopped supporting the free market rate. 
A 25% overnight drop in the dollar would be remarkably equivalent to a 25% tariff. 
Imports would stop. 
Recession would dawn immediately in Japan and other exporting countries. 
The immediate effect in the U.S. would be highly inflationary, and bond markets would collapse. 
Other nations would also hasten to devalue, spreading the effect. 
U.S. manufacturers would find that they too are dependent on both imported intermediates and export markets. 
The result would be a quick fall in production and standards of living -- not only in the U.S., but at least as much in Germany and Switzerland, whose stock markets have fallen even more. 

   Count one guess that the market has just told us that a nightmare dollar collapse has suddenly become much more likely, as a market-closing tariff became more likely in October of 1929. 

   It hasn't happened yet, of course, and need not. 
Since the appointment of Paul Volcker by Jimmy Carter in 1979, the U.S. has been remarkably deft in dancing along the precipice. 
The Volcker monetary policy succeeded in stemming a world-wide inflation far more quickly than the conventional wisdom thought possible. 
And thanks to the Reagan tax cuts offsetting tight money, this was done without serious damage to the real economy (despite the 1982 recession, which might have been shallower had the tax cuts not been phased in so slowly). 
Expansion has been under way for 59 months. 
There has been no explosion in debt-ridden Third World nations, indeed a spread of entrepreneurialism and democracy. 
There of course remain problems in undisciplined federal spending, exchange-rate instability, and remaining debts and other damage lingering from the inflation. 
But much has been accomplished. 
And much would be given away if our policy makers, like President Hoover, were so shaken by the market crash they rushed to embrace the errors the market was warning them against. 

   ---
   Mr. Bartley is editor of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
