ID: 261	RANK: 2	SCORE: 13.695026
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870817-0109 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Toward a 'Warrior Age'
---
By Alan Reynolds</HL>
<DD> 08/17/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Ravi Batra's best-selling "The Great Depression of 1990" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 235 pages, $17.95) predicts "the worst economic turmoil in history . . . more cataclysmic than any mankind has yet seen." 
It gains credibility from a foreword by Lester Thurow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who calls it "novel and brilliant." 
Mr. Batra has already made the cover of Financial World. 

   "I am no astrologer, no psychic," the author assures us, "not a sensationalist or a Jeremiah." 
But that doesn't exhaust the possibilities. 
Mr. Batra is proud of his "obsession" with the teachings of Prabhat Ranja Sarkar, described as an expert in many disciplines, "above all, spirituality." 
The disciple discovered that "here at last was a philosophy of history that in one stroke could unravel the mystery of every social phenomenon." 
Like Marx, Mr. Batra's guru preaches historical determinism and class conflict, but adds warriors and intellectuals to the usual classes of exploited laborers and greedy acquisitors (capitalists). 

   "The acquisitors grow richer and richer at the expense of other classes," the author explains. 
Fortunately, this "will force a crisis that will ultimately give way to sanity in politics, the economy, and the general state of affairs." 

   "Eventually, things become so wretched that angry warriors and intellectuals rise in rebellion and with the help of laborers bring an end to the age of acquisitors. . . . 
Society will then move into another warrior age." 

   What will this new "sanity" look like? 
"In the warrior age the army, headed by a dictator . . . controls the government as well as society. 
Political authority is centralized in the form of an absolute government, people are highly disciplined, family ties are morally binding, women are well respected, and so on." 

   Next, Mr. Batra takes up the "exact pattern" of business cycles. 
He describes an "amazing phenomenon, namely that over the last 230 years the decennial rate of inflation reached a peak every third decade." 
Inflation thus "peaked" at zero in the 1830s, then really peaked in the 1860s, during the Civil War. 
The next inflation peak should have come 30 years thence, in the deflationary 1890s. 
But the author explains that his exact three-decade cycle was "disturbed," so inflation instead "reappears in the 1910s" and "crests in the 1940s." 
That is, inflation peaked during both World Wars. 

   Unfortunately, these supposedly amazing cycles contradict his forecast of depression. 
Mr. Batra believes that "money, nothing else, is the source of all oscillations under capitalism." 
Yet he merely expects in the next few years, leading up to and during the coming depression, "a relatively restrained expansion of money growth . . . {and} more or less stable prices." 

   Since his three wartime cycles are irrelevant, Mr. Batra offers another -- "a great depression every third or sixth decade." 
He does not mention the 1893-96 depression, since that was only two decades after the 1873-76 depression. 
We instead jump six decades to the 1930s, then another six to the 1990s. 
But why 1990 rather than, say, 1994 or 1998? 
"Since our data are aggregated over a decade," he explains, every third decade "means . . . every twenty-nine to thirty-one years . . ." Those who can swallow that are ready for the next bite -- that this year will look like 1927, and so on through the crash of 1929 and 1989. 

   Mr. Batra claims, moreover, that these cyclical depressions are also "caused by an extreme concentration of wealth." 
To reconcile these two theories, inequality of wealth would have to peak every 60 years, but he has a shorter time frame in mind. 
Mr. Batra asserts, "The seeds of a new depression have already been sown by the Reagan Administration." 
The loyal opposition finally found someone to say that lower tax rates and higher stock prices are a terrible thing. 

   To show that the 1% holds a rising share of wealth, Mr. Batra picks numbers from two archaic sources for years up to 1969, then switches to an entirely different source and jumps to 1983. 
The figures aren't remotely comparable. 
For some years, they are based on flimsy estate-tax data; for others, on small surveys. 
In addition, Mr. Batra's table mixes "adults" with "families." 
In any case, changing proportions of young families with mortgages and older households with assets explain most changes in shares of net worth -- there were more young debtors when the baby boomers first entered the work force. 

   Mr. Batra argues that stock prices go too high because the rich are getting richer, and the rich get richer because stock prices go too high. 
"Speculative fever cannot begin in the absence of wealth disparity," he explains, "for only the very rich can afford to squander money." 
Yet he advises readers that "your best bet may be to buy no-load or low-load mutual funds investing in growth stocks. 
Such funds are run by savvy managers." 

   To prevent the depression, Mr. Batra proposes a $133 billion federal property tax on the top percent of wealth holders, and steeper marginal tax rates on income than we had in 1980. 
Mr. Batra also proposes that "the majority stock of large corporations should be distributed among blue- and white-collar employees. . . . 
Company profits . . . would be distributed among the masses. . . . 
Private initiative and investment should be limited to small corporations or proprietorships. . . . 
The maximum salary in any industry should be no more than ten times the minimum wage . . . {and} there should be ceilings on inherited wealth linked to the minimum wage." 

   The result of this "system where egalitarianism becomes part and parcel of the economy" would be permanent depression, of course, but that is probably the whole idea. 
Without the depression, there cannot be the revolution leading to a blissful egalitarian dictatorship of the warrior class. 

   ---
   Mr. Reynolds is vice president of Polyconomics of Morristown, N.J. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
