ID: 261	RANK: 21	SCORE: 9.808723
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871222-0097 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

Worries About Overreactions
---
By Alfred L. Malabre Jr. and Lindley H. Clark Jr.
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   "One year after the Great Depression started, there was a lot of talk among economists about the mildness of the decline." 

   The late Arthur F. Burns, the Federal Reserve chairman under Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter, made that comment several years ago. 
Ever since the Depression, economists and the general public have agonized over whether anything like the Depression could happen again. 
Right now, two months after the stock-market crash of Oct. 19, most economists, like their predecessors 57 years ago, think the economy has stood the shock remarkably well. 

   Every other year or so, this newspaper surveys a diverse group of 10 eminent economists to find out what they think about the economic outlook. 
What do the current panel members, who include five Nobel laureates and range from liberals to conservatives, think now? 

   Surprisingly, the crash hasn't greatly changed their view of the economic future. 
Most of them think the market's slump makes a recession more likely in the next year or so; as the accompanying table shows, an economic downturn has followed nearly every major plunge by the market since 1906. 
They worry about serious problems that, if not handled carefully, could cause major trouble later on. 
But none of them flatly predict a recession, much less another depression. 

   Reasonably typical is Kenneth Arrow, a Nobel laureate at Stanford University. 
"While I wouldn't rule out the chances of a recession ahead," he says, "I do think we're marginally better than we were years ago at controlling the business cycle. 
I do think we can avoid a repetition of the early 1930s." 

   Paul Samuelson, a Nobel Prize winner at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, says, "We still hold the financial system together with chewing gum. 
We simply have been very lucky up to now. 
If the shock to the world stock markets stays about where it is and we follow sensible policies, a 3% growth rate in the next year or so may become 2%. 
If other markets fall and all the shoes haven't dropped in our market, it could be worse." 

   His No. 1 worry: "All the considerations that would have prepared you for the U.S. market crash also apply in Japan. 
A Tokyo crash could spur a flow of funds out of U.S. markets" as Japanese investors seek to cover their losses. 

   Depressions are far worse than recessions, of course. 
Overall business activity turned down in all 11 slumps shown in the accompanying table. 
But the distinction between slumps after World War II and the two in the 1930s is striking. 
In the prewar downturns, unemployment reached 20% or more, dwarfing the rates in even the worst postwar recessions. 

   The economists think that the current unemployment rate, now near 6%, might move a little higher in the next year, but no one is talking of anything near prewar rates. 
Geoffrey H. Moore, a Columbia University authority on business-cycle developments world-wide, is encouraged because "service jobs, which generally are more stable than ones in manufacturing, constitute a much larger fraction of the work force -- about 70% at present -- than in 1929." 
In 1929, only about one-third had service jobs. 

   But members of the panel see much to worry about, though not all of it is easy to define. 
"People thought things looked pretty good in 1930, but there was an underlying malaise," says Charles P. Kindleberger, an MIT economist who has written extensively on the Depression. 
Now, he adds, "the malaise is still around. 
Everyone is dug in, unwilling to sacrifice anything for the general interest. 
The idea is to let George do it; I've always wondered who George was." 

   A major focus of the panel's concern is the dollar and what the U.S. government may do about it. 
Martin Feldstein, a Harvard economist and the president of the National Bureau of Economic Research, says he was pleasantly surprised to hear the government disavow any plan to peg the dollar at a fixed level. 

   "The United States should acknowledge that the dollar must decline significantly, and return to a policy of noninterference with the exchange rate," Mr. Feldstein says. 
He also argues that the U.S. should stop trying to dictate to other nations: "Japan, Germany and other industrial nations have the right to guide their own monetary and fiscal policies as they wish." 

   One reason for the market's uncertainty, Mr. Feldstein says, is fear that the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates to make U.S. investments more attractive to foreigners and thus defend the dollar. 
Karl Brunner, a University of Rochester economist, goes further: "The uncertainty stems from the fact that the markets simply don't know what the government will do. 
Congress waits until the president comes up with a policy, and then they're automatically against it." 

   Robert Hall, a Stanford economist and the chairman of a National Bureau of Economic Research committee that decides officially when recessions begin and end, notes that the fact the group hasn't any plans for a meeting reflects a certain optimism. 
His chief fear appears to be that Washington may try to do too much. 
"The best policy," he says, "is to ignore the dollar's fluctuations." 

   Also worrying that the government will try to do too much to control the economy is Milton Friedman, a Nobel Prize winner at the Hoover Institution. 
"I get phone calls all the time, asking, 'What should the government do now?'" he says. 
"The answer is simple. 
The government should do what it should have been doing, but wasn't doing, before. 
We need sound and stable fiscal and monetary policies, just like we did before the crash." 

   One of the worries often mentioned in connection with the stock-market crash is the fact that the price collapse wiped out some $1 trillion of asset values. 
Members of the panel agree that that drop will reduce consumption by an amount equal to 4% to 5% of the loss in asset value, with a lag of a few months, but none of them expect the effect to be catastrophic. 

   "Stock prices went up so rapidly this year that people didn't know how rich they were. 
Now, many of them don't know how poor they are," comments Franco Modigliani, a Nobel laureate at MIT. Nonetheless, Mr. Modigliani, a longtime student of the consumer, believes that the crash will limit consumption. 

   Mr. Friedman notes that stock prices now are about where they were a year ago. 
"In December 1986, I didn't see any newspaper stories that people were so poor they couldn't afford to buy BMWs. 
There's a lot of talk about $1 trillion eroded from market values. 
Where did those dollars come from? 
From the rise earlier in the year. 
Where was the talk about the trillion dollars leading to an enormous explosion in consumer demand? 
It wasn't there. 
The impact of the market on the economy is grossly exaggerated." 

   Several members of the panel also think the role of the budget deficit is widely misunderstood. 
James Tobin, a Yale University Nobel laureate, scoffs at the widely held notion that cutting the budget deficit -- through reduced federal spending or higher taxes -- would, in and of itself, cut the trade deficit. 
He agrees that to offset any consequent slowing of the economy, demand must rise as a result of increased exports or lower imports. 
But, to ensure this, he believes that the dollar would have to fall significantly further. 
This strategy would also require that "monetary policy must ease sufficiently" to hold down interest rates, he adds. 

   None of the panelists argue for major tax increases now. 
Mr. Tobin, in fact, worries even about the relatively modest deficit-reduction package that Congress has been negotiating. 
The economy can probably cope with it, he says, if the Fed is generous enough in its monetary policy. 

   The panelists agree that the Fed's role will be crucial in the months ahead. 
"We tend to rely on the Fed to keep things stable," Stanford's Mr. Hall says, "and this requires good performance from the Fed, but I think we'll get it from {Chairman Alan} Greenspan. 
It's unthinkable that the Fed would let things fall apart as it did in the Great Depression." 

   Mr. Friedman has long contended that the Fed, by allowing the money supply to shrink sharply in the early 1930s, converted a recession into the Depression. 
However, his chief fear now is that the Fed will become too expansionary. 

   Mr. Brunner of Rochester, on the other hand, worries that the Fed may tighten credit too much in an effort to support the dollar. 
After the Oct. 19 crash, the Fed flooded the banks with funds, a move the panelists applaud. 
But more recently, the Fed has pulled out the extra funds, tightening credit again. 
Both Mr. Friedman and Mr. Brunner hope for steady, moderate growth from here on. 

   Some panel members express almost as much concern about politics as about economics. 
In "The World in Depression: 1929-1939," Mr. Kindleberger wrote that a major reason the collapse was so severe was that Britain no longer could lead the world financially and the U.S. was unwilling to lead it. 
Looking at the current crop of presidential candidates, he wonders about the nation's future leadership. 

   Mr. Friedman believes that the market collapsed last October because of a general fear that the Reagan administration had lost its ability to lead. 
He attributes that fear not to its economic policies but to the Iran-Contra affair and the foul-up over the Robert Bork nomination to the Supreme Court. 
"The markets feared we would raise taxes and pass strong protectionist legislation," he says, "and that the administration would be powerless to stop it." 
He adds that that possibility still worries him. 

   About the best the panel members see for the next year or so is an economy continuing to muddle along with low growth and perhaps somewhat more inflation. 
Major chores -- repairing the fragile financial system, reducing the budget and trade deficits, handling Third World debt, to name a few -- may have to wait for a new president who can work with Congress, Mr. Brunner says. 

   But can the U.S. wait? 
Mr. Kindleberger worries that any one of the nation's problems could explode at any time. 
"If disasters came one at a time," he says, "we could handle them. 
If all the Third World countries decide they won't pay any more money to U.S. banks, maybe the Fed could float the banking system over the problem. 
But if several things go wrong all at once, could we handle them?" 

   Thus, the panel is reasonably optimistic about the near term and doesn't see any severe downturn looming. 
But looking further ahead, the group is more pessimistic. 
Some of the economists fear that the government will try to solve its problems by inflating the economy. 
"The country as a whole," Mr. Kindleberger says, "often seems unwilling to face up to reality." 

   ---

                 The Big Market Breaks
   The 1938-42 bear market is the only one exceeding 35%, as
measured by the Dow Jones Industrial Avergae, that didn't
usher in a recession or depression, and it was also unusual
becvause it largely occured as World War II was intensifying.
Two other well-known market declines -- 27.1% in 1961-62 and
26.9% in 1976-78 -- also weren't followed by economic slumps,
but they were considerably milder than those listed below.
                                                       DJIA
 MARKET                                          PERCENTAGE
 DOWNTURN                                           DECLINE
 Jan. 19, 1906 to Nov. 15, 1907                       48.5%
 Economic slump began May 1907
 Nov. 21, 1916 to Dec. 19, 1917                       40.1
 Economic slump began Aug. 1918
 Nov. 3, 1919 to Aug. 24, 1921                        46.6
 Economic slump began Jan. 1920
 Sept. 3, 1929 to July 8, 1932                        89.2
 Economic slump began Aug. 1929
 March 10, 1937 to March 31, 1938                     49.1
 Economic slump began May 1937
 Nov. 12, 1938 to Apr. 28, 1942                       41.3
 No economic slump developed
 Dec. 3, 1968 to May 26, 1970                         35.9
 Economic slump began Dec. 1969
 Jan. 11, 1973 to Dec. 6, 1974                        45.1
 Economic slump began Nov. 1973
 Aug. 25 1987 to Oct. 19. 1987                        36.1
 No discernable slump thus far
   Source: Economic slumps were designated by the Commerce
Department
   ---
                     Eleven Business Slumps
                                     % DROP IN         PEAK
                         LENGTH     INDUSTRIAL      JOBLESS
                      IN MONTHS         OUTPUT         RATE
 Aug. '29 - Mar. '33         43           53.4         24.9
 May '37 - June '38          13           32.4         20.0
 Feb. '45 - Oct. '45          8           38.3          4.3
 Nov. '48 - Oct. '49         11            9.9          7.9
 July '53 - May '54          10           10.0          6.1
 Aug. '57 - Apr. '58          8           14.3          7.5
 Apr. '60 - Feb. '61         10            7.2          7.1
 Dec. '69 - Nov. '70         11            8.1          6.1
 Nov. '73 - Mar. '75         16           14.7          9.0
 Jan. '80 - July '80          6            8.7          7.8
 July '81 - Nov. '82         16           12.3         10.7

</TEXT>
</DOC>
