ID: 261	RANK: 24	SCORE: 9.146958
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871125-0142 </DOCNO>
<HL> Same Song,
Second Verse
After the Crash?
---
By Vermont Royster</HL>
<DD> 11/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   History never repeats itself exactly, but enough sometimes to send shivers down the spine. 
So it's inevitable, I suppose, that our recent Black Monday on the stock market should have made people talk about, and write about, autumnal 1929 and all that came thereafter. 

   Actually, there are few people today who have adult memories of that long-ago October when "the skies were ashen and sober, the leaves were withering and sere." 
I am a septuagenarian, but I was only a teen-ager when Wall Street's walls came tumbling down that other black day. 
What I do remember vividly is the aftermath. 
I was a college undergraduate when the banks were closed and I graduated into the middle of the Great Depression. 

   Still, though times are different now -- are they not? -- history buffs have much to ponder. 
For one, the big stock losses came not on that infamous Black Thursday but afterward. 
The market rallied, the buyers came back and then were annihilated when prices fell even further. 

   For another, it's not true that the government "did nothing" to deal with the crisis. 
Contrary to the received memory, Washington took several important actions in the economic field. 

   1.
The Federal Reserve Board tightened money (by raising the discount rate to 6%) presumably to dampen speculation. 

   2.
The House Ways and Means committee reported out a tax-increase bill ("soaking the rich") with a top rate of 45% in an effort to reduce the government's deficit. 
It also raised estate taxes and excise taxes on "nonessential" goods. 
The bill was passed by Congress and President Hoover reluctantly signed it. 

   3.
Congress also passed the Smoot-Hawley trade bill, which raised tariffs steeply and broadly in order to shield American industry and American jobs from foreign competition. 
President Hoover also reluctantly signed this. 

   4.
With the arrival of President Roosevelt in 1933 the dollar was devalued by changing (almost daily) the price the U.S. would pay for gold. 

   There were other measures taken, but these had the greatest effect. 

   The Reserve Board's action reduced liquidity. 
The tax increase cut into consumer spending. 
The tariff hikes launched a world-wide trade war. 
The dollar devaluation sparked new speculation. 

   In June 1933 the stock market boiled again, as did commodity markets. 
As one Wall Street expert (quoted by Frederick Lewis Allen) remarked, "If we don't have prosperity we'll at least have inflation." 
In 1932 the thought of inflation prompted selling; this time it prompted buying. 

   Yet in July 1933 the markets collapsed again. 
In that month the volume of trading on the NYSE exceeded any month of the 1929 boom except for that in October, the month of the big fall. 

   After that, not all Roosevelt's men could put Humpty Dumpty together again. 
In the fall of 1932, on the eve of the election, unemployment stood at 11.5 million. 
In January 1939, on the eve of World War II, unemployment was still 11.3 million. 

   Today, of course, things are different. 
This time the Federal Reserve Board acted to ease money and increase liquidity. 
There has been no increase in taxes, no hikes in our tariffs. 
As yet. 

   But what is the talk in Congress these days? 
The House Ways and Means Committee (once more controlled by Democrats) is talking about raising taxes to reduce the budget deficit. 
All over Congress the members are talking of the need for new tariffs and/or quotas in order to protect industries in their districts from foreign competition. 

   As for dollar devaluation, we have already had it de facto as a result of U.S. actions to reduce the dollar's value in terms of other currencies. 
That 1933 devaluation didn't seem to help our exports much; in 1930 our excess of exports over imports (trade balance) was $782 million, in 1935 only $285 million. 
By 1936 it had dropped to barely $33 million. 
The effects of the cheaper dollar today are uncertain. 

   A history buff, then, has much to muse upon. 
The 1929 market collapse was clearly a precursor of the Depression. 
That one was the cause of the other is dubious. 
The market crash itself was caused by the same force that ended in Tulip Mania in Holland, the Mississippi Bubble in France, the land boom in Florida: speculative fever. 
And in 1929 you could borrow 90% of the price of a stock. 

   The following depression was a combination of this, of unwise government actions, of much too lax banking policies (between '29 and '32, banks all over went belly up), panic in Germany, Austria and England, and finally that never-to-be-repeated interregnum in the White House from November 1932 until March 1933 when we really had no government at all. 

   Of course, we could have again a similar concatenation of circumstances. 
But at least the 50% margin rate on stock purchases has dampened any renewed speculation; the banking system, while tremulous, hasn't folded. 
The government hasn't-as yet-raised income taxes or hiked tariffs. 
The public as a whole doesn't feel any poorer today than it did yesterday. 
Corporate profits are being sustained, the trade deficit is being reduced and the budget deficit may well be. 

   All this may make me sound a little like Pollyanna, but I've been too chastened by life to make cheerful economic forecasts. 
I leave prophecy to those more learned and bolder than I, even though I note that most of them were wrong six months ago. 

   The most I intend to suggest is that just because a certain sequence of events took place 60 years ago, and is burned in our collective memory, it doesn't follow that they will repeat themselves unless we choose to repeat past follies or invent new ones. 
All we have done so far is repeat the folly that the price of tulips (or stocks) can go ever upward with nary a pause. 

   The history we lived through from 1929 to the mid-1930s may repeat itself, true enough. 
But it ain't necessarily so. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
