ID: 261	RANK: 27	SCORE: 9.066290
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871019-0126 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
Time to Stand Tight</HL>
<DD> 10/19/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP TAXES
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)
TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The injury of the stock market plunge is bad enough, even if prices are still at levels considered high last May. 
But to add insult, we will now have to listen to all the people who've predicted doom every month of the 59-month business expansion, explaining to us yet again that higher taxes and a lower dollar would be good for stocks. 

   The stock decline since August and the rout last week have traced the disintegration of the Reagan administration in general and the Louvre exchange-rate accord in particular. 
The Bundesbank has been pushing up interest rates in the face of low inflation and high unemployment, and the Fed explained its discount-rate boost without reference to the dollar. 
The administration has been increasingly belabored; if it can't get the nation's most distinguished legal scholar confirmed to the Supreme Court, can it really fight off protectionism and make good on its pledge of no tax increases? 
And the big economic news last week was the action of the Democratic tax-writing committees, which put together packages featuring soak-the-rich proposals virtually designed to depress business activity, reduce tax revenues and push up the deficit they are ostensibly meant to reduce. 

   So we were reassured yesterday by Treasury Secretary Baker's remarks on "Meet the Press." 
He explicitly said that the Louvre agreement remains in effect, which means there is still a floor under the dollar exchange rates with the yen and d-mark. 
And in everything but name, he denied a leak the New York Times published Sunday saying the administration had abruptly changed to a policy of letting the dollar fall. (The news Mr. Baker was prepared to make on these pressing topics had to be amplified after the program, since after he brought up the dollar his Beltway interlocutors immediately went back to beating on him to raise taxes.) 

   Now, on these issues Secretary Baker is cast as Horatio at the Bridge. 
His recent suggestion of including gold in a basket of indicators was done over the opposition of his staff. 
No doubt the Times accurately reported what it was told; there are strong forces in the administration for a lower dollar. 
The recent denials of inflationary dangers by the secretary himself and by Fed Chairman Greenspan are certainly not helpful, and probably not accurate. 
The high price of gold and other commodities is an inflationary signal; certainly a further fall in the dollar would do more to raise inflation than to cut the trade deficit. 

   And of course, the secretary is justified in looking for something to do about the Germans. 
The Louvre boundaries imply a tighter monetary policy in the United States and an easier one in Japan and Germany. 
But the Germans are tightening, despite a stagnant economy and low inflation. 
While they profess to see inflation signs in M-whatever, the real problem is that the Germans do not want their "Gemuetlichkeit" disturbed by economic growth. 
When they tighten money to constrain growth, either the U.S. must follow or the Louvre boundaries must fall. 
So Mr. Baker is quite right to complain about their boosting interest rates and expecting the U.S. to do the same. 

   The answer to this surely is not to let the dollar fall, punishing ourselves (and throwing away the progress Secretary Baker has so painfully won toward exchange-rate stability). 
Short of sending the U.S. troops in Kaiserslautern to besiege the Bundesbank, the answer is to get on with exchange-rate stability with the French and British. 
Both have expressed sympathy with Mr. Baker's latest proposals, and neither can be interested in aborting their own impressive recoveries in order to protect Germany from the threat of Turkish immigrants. 
Faced with a U.S., British and French initiative to obsolete the German-led European Monetary System, the Germans would quickly fall in line. 

   On the domestic scene, meanwhile, everyone in Washington should write on a blackboard ten times a day, "Tax increases are bearish." 
If we can get this truism into Beltway minds, perhaps we could get on to subtleties, such as whether increases in tax rates increase revenues, whether a deficit signals too much spending or too little taxation, whether trade deficits mean anything and so on. 
Those who blame the twin-deficit mania for the stock-market decline need to explain why stocks rose in the first place. 

   The great stock market crash in 1929 came with the collapse of the political coalition against the Smoot-Hawley Tariff. 
In 1930, stocks remained at 1928 values until the tariff passed and President Hoover announced he would not veto. 
The fall in stocks caused by the protectionists encouraged the protectionists and shook the confidence of their foes. 
They carried the day and turned an ordinary correction into the Great Depression. (Not so incidentally, Hoover, Smoot and Hawley were all promptly cashiered by the electorate.) 

   The 1982-1987 bull market resulted from the Reagan policies, and the fall in the last two months resulted from renewed doubts about whether those policies would be sustained. 
The dramatic fall in stocks is all the more reason to stand tight: no tax increases, no protectionism and further initiatives toward exchange-rate stability. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
