ID: 261	RANK: 31	SCORE: 8.871784
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880104-0051 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK -- (Editorial): Years of Collision </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> ECO </IN>
<TEXT>
   As the New Year dawns, the economic outlook is even more clouded than usual, but we are going to sound a note of celebration. 
Today is the first day of business under a top tax rate of 28%. 
This quite remarkable development has been obscured by the October stock-market crash and the ongoing debacle of the dollar. 
But helped by weakening oil prices, the latest tax cut may yet prove to be the economic sleeper of 1988. 

   "At Last, a Tax Cut" were the first words in these columns at the opening of business in 1983. 
Then, as now, the conventional wisdom was pessimistic. 
The 1982 recession, it held, could not be ended without a tax increase, which was supposed to curb the deficit, which was supposed to lower interest rates. 
The supply-side fraternity instead focused on the tax cut finally coming into effect. 
The original Reagan cuts had been staggered, and indeed the first installments were offset by increases in Social Security taxes and "bracket creep." 
The first real cut came in January 1983, on which date recession ended and recovery began. 

   Today's 28% rate is again the second stage of the staggered tax cuts enacted in 1986. 
We have no doubt whatever that last year's economic statistics were depressed by individuals exploiting any opportunity to postpone income. 
Income realized in 1987 would be taxed at 38.5%; if it could be pushed into 1988 it would be taxed at 28% in the top brackets (33% on incomes between about $72,000 and $150,000). 
The deferred income will start to show up today, adding economic fuel. 
Indeed, we anticipate that much income will also be crowded into 1988 from future years; individuals will rush to realize income this year for fear politicians won't be able to keep their hands off the 28% rate. 
This effect is not incorporated into many economic models or forecasts, and to that extent they are likely to prove too pessimistic. 

   The new rates will provide powerful incentives for entrepreneurial enterprise and work efforts by our most productive citizens. 
We would go so far as to say the U.S. and world economies have the makings of a boom today, if other policy elements are put in place. 
But will they be? 

   The October 19 market collapse must certainly be accorded a pessimistic assessment. 
But the precise meaning of this event is a matter of puzzlement and controversy. 
Stocks did not continue to retreat after the initial collapse, the crash only wiped out the spectacular gains earlier in the year, and the market ended the year essentially flat. 
We believe in the stock market's record as an economic indicator, but what has the market really said? 

   In a broader historical perspective, you have to keep in mind that share prices, on which market averages are based, are expressed in nominal dollars. 
To use the stock market to make judgments about economic progress and economic policies, you have to take into account the effects of inflation. 
The chart above shows the Dow Jones Industrials converted into 1987 dollars. 
It shows that in the recent boom, stock prices, in terms of actual purchasing power, fell considerably short of their historical highs. 
While price-earnings multiples were high, underlying earnings remained pallid in comparison with the heyday of stocks in the late 1950s and early 1960s. 
Clearly, the volatility of 1987 made it a curious year. 

   What is perfectly clear from the inflation-adjusted chart, though, is that the debacle in the stock market was not in 1987, but over the years 1966-1981.
That is to say, in the years marked by the breakup of the Bretton Woods monetary system and the onset of inflation. 
With the Reagan-Volcker policies ending inflation and cutting taxes, the real value of share prices has recovered, despite the events of last October. 

   Our own view of the October 19 crash, elaborated by the editor on November 24, is that it was a warning shot about the dollar. 
The great 1929 crash was a warning about the developing Smoot-Hawley tariff, and need not have turned into the Great Depression had Congress changed its ways. 
A collapse of the dollar would have trade-blocking effects quite similar to a prohibitive tariff, and remains the truly dark cloud on the economic horizon today. 

   Unhappily, the Reagan administration seems at most fitfully aware of this danger. 
While it occasionally sends out a spokesman to lecture the markets, in ways reminiscent of the Carter administration, at other times it seems to believe a lower dollar would "solve" the trade deficit. 
In fact, experience has been that the deficit rises as the dollar falls. 
What markets are telling us is that the U.S. has created more dollars than the world wants to hold. 
But the administration has little appetite for creating fewer in an election year, or for starting serious work toward what is really needed --a new international order finally to replace Bretton Woods. 
The world economy still looks to Washington for leadership, but in vain. 

   Except, in fairness, perhaps in one particular. 
The new loan write-down agreements with Mexico have the scent of an important conceptual breakthrough. 
The Third World debt is at the center of many of the world's economic problems; international economic flows will never be normal until the developing nations attract investment and absorb exports from the developed nations. 
The debt, left over from the days of world inflation, makes investment prohibitively risky and leaves developing nations unable to afford imports. 

   What we need is an international equivalent of Chapter 11, wiping out unpayable debts and starting anew. 
The new Mexican agreements are the first arrangements that promise relief to the indebted countries without further adding to their debt load. 
They are more or less voluntary, creating market-like mechanisms to distinguish between debtors who are mending their domestic policies and those who are not. 
And they divide the burden of the debt with a certain rough justice. 
The banks share the responsibility, after all, for throwing money at the debtor nations. 
The taxpayers accept some risk by issuing zero-coupon Treasury bonds as collateral for the Mexicans, but they too bear some responsibility; their representatives, after all, created the bank reserves that drove the inflationary process. 

   Our view of 1988 is the same as our explanation of 1987. 
Two powerful forces are colliding. 
The spectacularly low tax rates are pushing the economy toward a great boom, and the spectacularly low dollar is pushing it toward a new depression. 
When one force seems to prevail you have a stock-market boom; when the other starts to prevail you have a sudden market crash. 
As the new year opens, both forces are still on the battlefield. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
