ID: 261	RANK: 32	SCORE: 8.805055
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861209-0070 </DOCNO>
<HL> '30s Banks Didn't Fail for Reasons You Think
---
By Bert Ely</HL>
<DD> 12/09/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN>
<TEXT>
   American banking has been handicapped for 53 years by regulations rooted in myths about the causes of the 1930-33 banking collapse. 
Common to these politically motivated myths is the notion that bank mismanagement caused the collapse. 
That notion is false. 
Yet the myths this notion has engendered are still driving public policy, while the real causes of the banking collapse are largely ignored. 

   The underlying cause of the crisis was the branch-banking restrictions that Congress and state legislatures imposed over many decades. 
In 1930 only 3% of the country's 23,700 banks had any branches at all. 
Thus, almost every bank held a small, geographically undiverse portfolio of loans. 
With only three or four employees, the average bank also was an easy target for fraud and embezzlement. 
The banking collapse, which cost bank depositors $1.3 billion, was a pre-ordained disaster because branching restrictions kept banks unnaturally small. 

   The median-size bank in 1930 had deposits of $400,000, just $3 million in today's dollars. 
Today's has deposits of $35 million. 
During the generally prosperous 1920s, banks below the median size were less profitable than larger banks and thus more likely to fail. 
This is why bank failures in that decade were 3.4 times higher than during the previous three decades. 

   The typical failed bank, invariably a rural one, was even tinier than the median-sized bank. 
Usually it failed because of fraud or a local economic catastrophe. 
These failures often deprived area farmers and merchants of their only source of business credit, thus worsening economic conditions in that locale. 
The independent bank, far from being the strength of small-town America, was its Achilles' heel. 
Yet despite these shortcomings, some nationwide branching restrictions remain in place today even with the recent spread of limited interstate banking. 

   The parochial attitudes of the Federal Reserve System at that time enhanced the potential for a banking disaster. 
The Fed, diffident about controlling the nation's money supply and disdainful of the two banks out of three that were not Fed members, was unwilling to act as lender of last resort to the entire banking system. 

   Although the stock market crash occurred in October 1929, the banking collapse did not begin until November 1930. 
By then, wholesale prices had declined by 16% from their peak in the summer of 1929. 
Price deflation of this magnitude will drive many banks into insolvency because they are highly leveraged and hold assets that lose value during deflations. 
Small banks are particularly susceptible to such deflation since they have fewer alternatives for diversifying their risks. 
The Fed accelerated this vicious downward spiral by permitting the money supply to decline 33% between November 1930 and March 1933, the end of the banking collapse. 

   The average number of banks that failed each month during the collapse was more than triple the monthly failure rate of the 1920s, while the monthly average of deposits in failed banks increased by a factor of seven. 
In all, 4,800 banks failed during the 28-month span of the collapse. 

   Canada provides an instructive contrast with America's tragic experience. 
During the Great Depression, just 10 banks operated almost 4,000 branches across Canada. 
Four banks had branches in every province; the rest operated regionally. 
Except for one relatively small failure in 1923, no Canadian bank failed during the 1920s and 1930s. 
Extensive branching, which gave Canadian banks a broad geographical dispersion of their banking risks, built soundness into the Canadian banking system. 

   In spite of the obvious causes of the banking collapse, several myths arose. 
The facts easily rebut them. 

   Myth One: Banks paid excessive interest rates on deposits. 

   Fact: During the late 1920s, bank interest rates remained amazingly flat while rates on alternative short-term investments skyrocketed. 

   Myth Two: Banks made bad loans during the 1920s. 

   Fact: The percentage rate of the extraordinary loan losses experienced by banks from 1930 to 1936 equaled just one-third of the price deflation percentage during that time. 
Had prices rebounded quickly after 1930, extraordinary loan losses would have been negligible. 
In other words, the high loan losses of the 1930s were caused by deflation, not by bad lending practices during the 1920s. 

   Myth Three: Investment banking activities of commercial banks caused bank failures, thus justifying the Glass-Steagall Act's separation of commercial from investment banking. 

   Fact: The data simply do not support this, since almost all of the 4,800 banks that failed during the banking collapse were much too small to conduct investment-banking activities. 

   Myth Four: Big city banks bled funds out of rural banks during the 1920s for relending in the stock market, thus depriving farmers and merchants of badly needed loans. 

   Fact: Country bank deposits in city banks, as a percentage of all bank deposits, were lower during the 1920s than immediately before or after. 
The entire 1927-29 increase in lending to stockbrokers came from outside the banking industry. 

   The new Congress must base today's banking legislation on the facts, not myths about what caused the banking collapse of the 1930s, if it is going to strengthen U.S. banking at home and in the international financial marketplace. 

   ---
   Mr. Ely, a financial consultant in Alexandria, Va., is writing on the banking collapse for the Cato Institute. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
