ID: 261	RANK: 33	SCORE: 8.576230
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871022-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> Central Banks
Must Coordinate
---
By Jack Kemp</HL>
<DD> 10/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP JAPAN TAXES
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
CONGRESS (CNG)
FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)
TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Many causes led to this week's world-wide stock-market drop, particularly -- -as some of us have warned -- a monetary system that was an accident waiting to happen and the growing threat of a trade war. 
But the ultimate reason is the lack of leadership in the world economy. 
If the world economy is to be stable, some country has to provide an open market, crack heads to ensure monetary stability and provide lending in distress. 
The market broke, in effect, because American leadership on all these fronts appeared to be crumbling. 

   Democrats are quick to draw parallels with the stock-market crash of 1929. 
The irony is that it's mostly the Democrats who want to repeat the mistakes that turned the Crash of '29 into the Great Depression. 
Democrats have contributed greatly to the crisis with their protectionist trade legislation and tax-increase proposals. 
This week they rushed forward with the unlikely theory that the markets are disappointed at Congress's failure to raise taxes. 
The trouble with this theory is that the deficit has fallen nearly 30% in the past year and Treasury-bond prices have risen since the stock market fell. 

   The immediate trigger, however, was Treasury Secretary James Baker's quarrel with the Germans over monetary policy last week. 
Stocks were already faltering after central bank tightening all over the world. 
When Mr. Baker indicated that the U.S. would permit another fall of the dollar, if the Bundesbank tightened again, it was a no-win choice for stocks: either a further liquidity squeeze or another competitive currency devaluation. 
On top of the administration's policy of apparent appeasement on trade, taxes and the budget, there seemed to be no one in charge of the world economy. 

   On Monday afternoon, I outlined a strategy for dealing with the financial crisis. 
First, the Federal Reserve and other central banks must step in aggressively to support the markets. 
Second, the Group of Five must agree to keep exchange rates stable. 
Third, the Democrats must withdraw their protectionist trade bill and tax-increase proposal. 
We've had action on two fronts, but more needs to be done. 

   First, the Federal Reserve has eased. 
And on Tuesday it announced that it was ready "to serve as a source of liquidity to support the economic and financial system." 
Treasury bonds and short-term bills rallied sharply, the dollar rose and gold fell. 
Even if this continues, it is no reason for complacency. 
The fall in interest rates is mostly a sign of deflationary pressure, not easing. 
What we see is a flight to quality, particularly into U.S. Treasury securities. 
The Fed should now open its discount window freely to nonmember financial institutions, in order to minimize any spillover from the stock market. 

   Second, the reaffirmation by the Group of Five finance ministers of the Louvre agreement to stabilize exchange rates is welcome. 
But more is necessary. 
The key central banks must coordinate to reduce interest rates. 
The primary threat is deflation, and coordinated interest-rate reduction would prevent that. 

   Once the immediate crisis is past, we need an economic summit to start the necessary process of more fundamental reform. 
It is abundantly clear that instability of exchange rates disrupts trade, investment and employment, and increases the pressure for protectionism. 
And Mr. Baker has proposed using a commodity index, including gold to ensure that exchange-rate stability does not mean global inflation or deflation. 
Thus, a consensus is growing that we need to restore a system of stable exchange rates and anchor the system against the price of commodities. 

   What has not yet been addressed is the use of foreign exchange -- dollars, marks and yen -- as central-bank "reserves." 
As Charles Kindleberger remarked of this practice in the 1920s, "foreign exchange is both an asset and a liability, and where there are alternative assets, such as gold or other currencies, it is a sensitive liability . . . an unstable component of the total." 
Massive official intervention to support the dollar helped finance stock-market speculation, and the threat of another sharp drop of the dollar ended it. 
Until we address this problem, the sustainability of stable exchange rates and low long-term interest rates will be threatened and the stock markets will continue to be driven by speculative currency considerations. 

   Finally, the Democrats have not withdrawn their trade bill or tax-increase proposals. 
The lunacy of repeating the mistake of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 and the tax increase of 1932 should be obvious. 
But the implications for the budget deserve more comment. 

   Although the rise of Treasury-bond prices indicates this is not primarily a domestic budget crisis, a continued reduction in the budget deficit is welcome -- if it means putting a lid on domestic spending. 
But a deficit-reduction package would be counterproductive if it means a tax rise. 

   A great danger is that the loss of wealth by investors will result in a sharp cutback in both domestic demand and imports. 
The fall in other countries' exports at a time when there is still excess capacity for most products would trigger a further round of devaluations, adding a further deflationary impulse to the world economy. 

   If we learned anything from the Hoover years, it is the folly of imposing a tax increase in a financial crisis. 
This is not a time for appeasing the Democrats with a tax increase, but for standing them down. 
If the Democrats refuse to cooperate, the president must make an ironclad commitment to veto any trade or tax bill. 

   With bold and timely action, we can restore stability to the world economy. 
In fact, if the stock-market drop has the result of ending the international foot-dragging on economic reforms, the outlook will be one of renewed confidence in long-term investment, stability of prices and exchange rates, and global prosperity. 

   ---
   Mr. Kemp (R., N.Y.) is a candidate for the presidency. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
