ID: 261	RANK: 36	SCORE: 8.477366
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880304-0136 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Floating Rates Vs. Monetary Standard </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> EUROP </CO>
<IN> MON FRX PCS CMD </IN>
<TEXT>
   Your editorial "Economic Olympiad" and the accompanying editorial-page article on "Rebuilding an International Monetary System" by French Finance Minister Edouard Balladur (Feb. 23) claim that a return to "the discipline of stable exchange rates" is desirable if not essential to end "the monetary and economic disorders" of "the past 15 years." 

   The U.S. and other major countries were on a rigid gold standard from 1879 to 1914. 
Exchange rates were stable. 
Yet that did not prevent four major banking panics (1884, 1890, 1893, 1907), a major depression in the 1890s, a severe contraction in 1907 and repeated recessions. 
Indeed, of the 436 months between the resumption of the gold standard in 1879 and the outbreak of World War I, the National Bureau of Economic Research classifies 203, or nearly half, as months of recession -- a far worse record than in the post-World War II period. 

   The U.S. remained on a gold standard during and after World War I and was joined by Germany in 1924, Britain in 1925 and France in 1928 -- restoring "the discipline of stable exchange rates." 
That did not prevent the Great Depression of 1929-1933 and the accompanying collapse of stable exchange rates. 

   The discipline was supposedly restored from 1945-1971 by the Bretton Woods agreements. 
Yet, "of twenty-one major industrial countries, only two -- the United States and Japan -- had no change in par value. 
Twelve of the twenty-one devalued their currencies more than 30 percent against the dollar, and four . . . had upward revaluations. 
At mid-1971, four countries . . . had floating or semi-floating exchange rates," according to A. James Meigs, "Money Matters". 

   Moreover, the discipline of Bretton Woods did not prevent the U.S. from embarking on an inflationary course in the 1960s that forced the end of our commitment to Bretton Woods in 1971. 
The "monetary and economic disorders" of "the past 15 years" owe much to release of distortions suppressed by Bretton Woods. 
In the main, however, they are a reaction to a world monetary system that has no historical precedent. 

   We have been sailing on uncharted waters and it has been taking time to learn the safest routes. 
But we are learning -- not least from such mistaken policies as the Louvre Agreement. 

   Minister Balladur asserts that "last year's Louvre Agreements marked the end of the floating-exchange-rate system." 
If so, the markets have not yet noticed. 
I predict that it will be a very long time, if ever, before the floating-exchange system is ended. 
Of course, it will unfortunately remain, as it has been, a dirty floating-exchange system, not the clean system that believers in free markets should prefer. 

   Milton Friedman
   Hoover Institution
   Stanford, Calif.
   ---
   I found Mr. Balladur's proposal for an objective monetary standard with automatic trigger mechanisms noteworthy and deserving of serious study. 

   Nevertheless, I was reminded of Europe's own failure to achieve regional economic union by the familiar concluding rhetoric: "I would like to see us {move forward} with the greatest of caution and realism but also with imagination and boldness." 
In addition to the obligatory Continental rhetoric, he proposed establishing a small committee of "distinguished people" to "light . . . our way." 
Seeing that the road to Europe's own economic disunion is strewn with reports from distinguished committees (from the Barre Report in the late 1960s to the Werner Committee of the early 1970s and later the Tindemans report), it is difficult to believe that the work product of such a committee, no matter how meritorious, would be taken seriously by national politicians. 

   And one can't help but wonder whether Mr. Balladur is seeking international monetary integration as a means of avoiding the painful reality of Europe's own failure to achieve economic union at home. 

   French insistence on unanimous European Council decisions via the Accords de Luxumbourg (European constitution crisis of 1966), its focus on the trivial issue of whether monetary or fiscal policy unification would have to come first in achieving economic union during the deliberations of the Werner Committee, its withdrawal from the "snake" foreign-exchange system in the mid 1970s, all have gone a long way toward ensuring that European monetary unification was never achieved. 

   The "founding father" of the European Community, Jean Monnet, hoped that limited functional integration ultimately could lead to full economic union in Europe. 
Similarly, successful regional integration of monetary policy in Europe would provide the legal, political and cultural examples for international monetary coordination or unification. 

   Jean Monnet once said, "Like Americans, I was trained to think that if something needs to be changed every man has the right to point this out." 
This American would point out that Europeans might get their own house in order before they ask the entire world to achieve what they themselves have been unable to achieve after 30 years of efforts toward regional monetary integration. 

   Timothy DeWitt
   Berkeley, Calif.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
