ID: 261	RANK: 49	SCORE: 7.974906
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880509-0098 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Outlook: Shaky Statistics Pose Peril for Forecasters </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alfred L. Malabre Jr. </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> ECO </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Arthur Burns, a close student of business-cycle history, regarded improved statistical radar as a reassuring safeguard against any repetition of the Great Depression. 
In the years preceding the big slump of the 1930s, as the noted economist often recalled, the nation's policy makers were "flying blind," devoid of such now-familiar monthly data as the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators. 
Even as basic a number as the unemployment rate wasn't compiled regularly. 

   Mr. Burns, 25 years old when the Great Depression began, is gone. 
But one must question whether he would still find very much reassurance in the statistical radar available nowadays to policy makers. 

   It's not that too few numbers are available today, as was the case when the Great Depression struck. 
Some important statistics have been scrapped by the Reagan administration, to be sure. 
But the main difficulty now is that much of the available data, unadjusted for a fast-changing economy, appears in need of major overhaul. 

   Things have reached a point, in fact, where many economic forecasters share the dismay of Lacy Hunt of Carroll McEntee &amp; McGinley. 
Writing recently in this paper, he called the Commerce Department's leadingindicator index "antiquated" and "no longer relevant" to the economy's actual performance or prospects. 
He concluded that the barometer "should be abandoned." 

   Economists are finding all sorts of problems with the numbers coming from Washington's data mills. 

   Geoffrey Moore, a former U.S. commissioner of labor statistics, laments the manner, for instance, in which the Commerce Department puts together its monthly series on contracts and orders for plant and equipment, a key component of the leading-indicator index. 

   In the real world, increasingly, such orders are placed with foreign firms. 
Economists at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. estimate that U.S. imports of capital goods have roughly tripled, to nearly $100 billion annually, in the last five years. 
This is far sharper than the overall rise in capital outlays of about one-third in the same period. 

   Yet, Mr. Moore notes, the Commerce survey still reflects only orders received at firms operating in the U.S. 
The economist, who now heads the Center for International Business Cycle Research at Columbia University, maintains that a broader survey, encompassing all such orders, imports as well as those placed domestically, could readily be constructed. 
However, he adds, "that would cost some money that the government doesn't seem willing to spend." 

   Interestingly, the plant-and-equipment series was among the few components of the leading-indicator index to decline in both February and March, the latest months available and ones in which the index as a whole rose briskly, suggesting stronger economic growth ahead. 
Were the plant-and-equipment series broader-based, it seems reasonable that the leading-indicator index would have risen still more briskly. 

   It also seems likely that fewer forecasters would have seriously underestimated the economy's actual strength in recent months. 
Overall economic activity rose at an annual rate of 2.3% in the first quarter. 
Yet, as recently as early March, the 50 forecasters polled each month by Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a newsletter, reckoned on average that the economy's first-quarter rise would amount to only 0.7%. 

   The economic role of service businesses, which has expanded greatly over the years, also tends to be neglected. 
Indeed, had the vigorous service sector received more attention in the leading-indicator index, the economy's recent strength would surely be less of a surprise. 

   Most of the 11 series that make up the Commerce index focus entirely or in large measure on the economy's goods-producing sectors. 
The component measuring weekly hours of work, for example, is for only nonsupervisory workers in manufacturing. 
It is worth noting that this series, like the plant-and-equipment series, showed a decline in February and March. 

   Efforts are under way, it should be added, to improve the situation. 
Mr. Moore's Columbia group is constructing a new set of indexes focusing on activity in the service sector. 
And, with a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the group has prepared for consideration by Commerce officials a revised, expanded leading-indicator index of 15 components. 

   The recommended additions include the Dow Jones price index for 20 corporate bonds; a measure of the number of businesses in operation, including service firms; and a series showing the rate at which workers are being laid off. 

   The Labor Department compiled such a series for many years, and it was a part of the leading-indicator index. 
But the agency abandoned the statistic early in the Reagan presidency in a cost-cutting move. 
In its place is an unemployment-claims measure that many analysts deem less useful than the layoff rate as an economic precursor. 

   Also scrapped was a series showing the rate at which workers quit their jobs. 
Some forecasters viewed this series as a better barometer of consumer confidence than any survey since, as Mr. Moore says, "it takes real confidence to quit your job." 

   If Arthur Burns was even half right, the recent frugal approach to data-gathering could prove penny-wise and pound-foolish. 
In any event, with today's fast-changing economic scene, improving the statistical radar seems an urgent matter. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
