ID: 261	RANK: 5	SCORE: 12.299876
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870410-0092 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
Theorie de L'Offre</HL>
<DD> 04/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   French Finance Minister Edouard Balladur took time out from the G-7 meetings in Washington Wednesday to declare a new Chevalier of the Legion of Honor, Paul Craig Roberts, that stalwart of supply-side economics. 
As Mr. Balladur's description of the Chirac economic policies shows nearby, the government of France is having a romance with supply-side theory, or "theorie de l'offre." (See: "What France's Economic Policy Means" -- WSJ April 10, 1987) 

   As well it should, since it was that historic Frenchman,
Jean Baptiste Say, who first proclaimed that supply creates
its own demand. The current supply-side movement is
fundamentally a resurrection of classical, pre-Keynesian
economics -- Say's Law above all. It was Say's insight that
the essence of an economy is the circular flow of income: The
wages paid to workers are recycled as demand for products;
savings are recycled as investment. Barring some outside
interference, everything will balance.
   This classical belief was shaken by the Great Depression, which John Maynard Keynes sought to explain. 
Keynes was beyond doubt a great economist, and his ideas came to dominate economic thought, at least in English-speaking nations. 
But his disciples carried these ideas to ridiculous lengths. 
The same people who scoff at the Laffer Curve will solemnly explain the Balanced Budget Multiplier, which professes that you can stimulate the economy by raising taxes. 
Indeed, Keynesian fascination with aggregrate demand became a de facto endorsement of highly progressive tax systems; the "rich" might have more money than they could spend, so the government should take it and give it to those with a higher "marginal propensity to consume." 

   In the stagflation of the 1970s, the Keynesian model fell apart; it could offer no analysis or even an explanation. 
Nowhere was this better explained than in Craig Roberts's seminal 1978 article in Irving Kristol's magazine, The Public Interest. 
Mr. Roberts, of course, also served as an aide to Congressman Jack Kemp, as an editorial writer for this newspaper and as assistant secretary of the treasury when the first Reagan tax cut was passed. 

   With Keynesian dominance broken, there was a new receptivity to classical ideas and to interest in the supply side, incentives and relative prices. 
The disincentive effects of high marginal tax rates were quickly recognized. 
The Great Depression itself has been reconsidered in light of Jude Wanniski's suggestion that the 1929 stock-market collapse represented efficient markets observing political developments and correctly anticipating the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1930 -- a plausible explantion of why the crash came before the tariff. 
In this light the Depression can be understood as, far from a refutation of Say's Law, the ugly result of a protectionist blockage of the circular flows of income. 

   The thrust of these arguments is perfectly understood by Minister Balladur, a recent recipient of the Lehrman Institute's Prix Reuff (Columbia economist Robert Mundell and Le Monde's Paul Fabra were previous recipients). 
In awarding the Legion of Honor to Mr. Roberts, the minister remarked: "Henceforth it is no longer possible to consider tax policy as simply a means of filling the state coffers or as an innocent means of transferring revenues. 
From now on, tax policy targeting individuals and businesses plays a central role in the economic policy of a country and gives it its direction." 

   These insights, Mr. Balladur continued, are spreading internationally. 
"This orientation of fiscal policy inspires reflection and galvanizes action in several countries. 
Great Britain, West Germany, Australia, India and Israel have understood the necessity of reducing the tax burden, thereby joining your country, the first to commit itself to this path." 

   From the first, we might add, supply-side economics had not only a fiscal side but a monetary one. 
In response to stagflation, it prescribed tax cuts to stimulate the real economy and monetary restraint to curb inflation. 
While supply-side tax policy is in place in the U.S. and spreading elsewhere, the monetary side remains troubled by unstable exchange rates and interest rates. 
This Minister Balladur did not mention in his remarks at the Roberts presentation; it was, though, the main business before him and the rest of the world's finance ministers in Washington this week. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
