ID: 261	RANK: 51	SCORE: 7.955773
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871022-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> Monetary Policy Caused the Crash
---
... Too Tight Already
---
By Paul Craig Roberts</HL>
<DD> 10/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)
TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The supply-side effort during the 1980s in the U.S., the United Kingdom, and more recently France to restore private-sector economic growth and incentives has been delivered another serious blow by the anti-growth forces that control the world's most important central banks. 
The unprecedented collapse in global equity markets was caused by the disastrous rise in interest rates that preceded the stock-market crash around the world. 

   In the U.S., the reserves of the banking system were at the same level this past Oct. 7 as they were Dec. 31 of last year. 
That is, there has been no money growth in the U.S. in 1987. 
Since the economy was growing, interest rates had to rise. 
Prior to the stock-market crash, long-term U.S. interest rates had risen 40%! 
Last month the Federal Reserve Board actually raised the discount rate, theorizing that a rise in this closely watched rate would reassure financial markets by demonstrating that the Fed was on guard against inflation. 

   In practice, this theory turned out to be crackpot. 
The market understood rising interest rates would wreck the economy and sold off. 
It is difficult to comprehend how the Fed could overlook the accumulated experience that stock markets -- especially nervous ones at historic highs -- sell off in the face of rising interest rates. 

   If U.S. monetary policy was irresponsible, West German monetary policy was idiotic. 
Even after the U.S. stock market had turned down, the Germans raised interest rates. 
The immediate effect was panic in the U.S. market that the Fed would be forced to raise interest rates further in order to "protect the dollar." 
Treasury Secretary Baker's attempt to forestall panic by ruling out higher interest rates did not succeed, because it caused an equivalent fear that foreigners would sell U.S. stocks to avoid an exchange-rate loss. 
Anticipating either higher interest rates or a decline in the dollar and foreign selling, Americans sold into a declining market. 

   Other countries, observing the U.S. stock market predict recession, realized the game was up for their export-based economies and sold off their stocks. 
What we face is a global prediction of global recession. 
The prediction's accuracy and the severity of the downturn will depend on the actions of central banks. 

   It is frightening that the explanations of Monday's stock-market crash do not mention monetary policy and rising interest rates. 
The New York Times blames the U.S. budget deficit, but the week before the crash the government announced that the budget deficit had declined $70 billion, or 32%, surely a reassuring sign. 
Others blame the U.S. trade deficit, the mainstay of the world economy, predicting a lower dollar and higher inflation. 
However, if this were the correct explanation, the dollar would have sold off. 
We should keep in mind that stock markets crashed in countries with large trade surpluses and in countries with near budget balance. 
The fact that stocks sold off while U.S. bonds rallied and the dollar remained unchanged is a clear indication that markets believe monetary tightness is leading to recession. 

   The margin for further monetary error is wide. 
The Fed staff apparently has convinced the central bank's governors that the rise in interest rates was due to rising inflation expectations rather than to Fed policy. 
It is extraordinary that the Fed could believe there has been a rise in inflation expectations during a period when there has been no growth in the money supply. 
A central bank so misguided can compound its error and replay the Great Depression. 

   The German central bank is even more incredible. 
It believes that if Americans would raise taxes and reduce consumption, the world economy would be fine. 

   A stock-market crash of this magnitude brings the left's political agenda out of the closet to which it had been forced by the renewal of prosperity, and it is a gift to the Democratic Party, which previously had no prospect of regaining the White House next year. 
Now Democrats can blame President Reagan for the stock-market crash and for any recession that might follow. 
The opportunity to blame Mr. Reagan means the Democrats have no incentive to hold the independent central bank accountable, thereby increasing the likelihood of further errors in monetary policy. 

   Even more unpromising, some supply-side advocates, including the editorial page of The Wall Street Journal, agree with the Fed's self-serving argument that the dollar must be defended to avoid exchange-rate instability even if it means higher interest rates. 
Facts do not seem able to penetrate this point of view. 
The day of the stock-market crash, the Journal's lead editorial said: "Time to Stand Tight." 
The day after the crash, the Journal's editorial explained the greatest destruction of wealth in history as a mere "warning shot" about "exchange-rate instability" and "a possible collapse of the value of the dollar." 
The high interest-rate policy of supporting the dollar crashed the market. 
One can only marvel that influential supply-siders are willing to help engineer their own destruction. 

   There is little doubt that exchange-rate stability is desirable, but so is economic stability. 
And to sacrifice the latter to the former will bring left-wing governments to power and not a gold standard. 

   Consistent with the stock market's prediction of recession, a strong rally has started in long-term Treasury bonds (and gold stocks have collapsed). 
The Federal Reserve must seize this opportunity to cut the discount rate, and it must sustain the drop in long-term interest rates by purchasing bonds if necessary. 
If the Federal Reserve aborts the recovery of the bond market, stocks will go lower and recession will set in. 
With it could go the promise of economic renewal that the supply side brought to the world economy. 

   (See related story -- "Not Tight Enough ..." -- WSJ Oct. 22, 1987) 

   ---
   Mr. Roberts, who was assistant Treasury secretary for economic policy during 1981-82, holds the Simon chair in political economy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
