ID: 261	RANK: 52	SCORE: 7.919737
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881019-0047 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Markets -- A Year Later --- Why Buy? Investors' Aversion To Purchasing Stocks May Be a Costly Error --- Equities for the Long Term Tend to Outpace Bonds, And Risk Brings Rewards --- Finding the Right Asset Mix </HL>
<AUTHOR> Randall Smith (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR </CO>
<IN> STK SCR BON FND PCS CMD </IN>
<TEXT>
   It was a day you can't forget, much as you might like to. 
It has joined a handful of other calamities -- such as Pearl Harbor and President Kennedy's assassination -- that trigger memories of where you were when disaster struck. 
It was Black Monday, and it happened a year ago today. 

   On Oct. 19, 1987, the stock market crashed, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunging an unprecedented 508 points. 
Many investors couldn't even reach their brokers to protect themselves by selling their stocks. 
The next day, with people paralyzed by fear, the market verged on collapse. 

   Now, after all the investigations and post-mortems, one basic question still troubles most investors: Should anyone buy stocks? 

   Many individuals are so devastated that they have sworn off stocks entirely. 
Benjamin Lambert, the chairman of Eastdil Realty Inc., of New York, realized after the crash that he was "probably too heavily invested in the market," and he decided to sell most of his stocks once they recovered. 
"I'm not that risk-oriented," he says. 

   The crash has taught a painful lesson: Stocks can rise and fall rapidly, and thus they are risky, maybe too risky for some people. 
But others who, for emotional reasons, keep out of the market their long-term savings, the money they won't need for some years, may be cheating themselves out of returns that could pay for college tuitions or a comfortable retirement. 

   "If you eliminate or reduce your holdings in stocks to an extreme, you buy lots of short-term 'peace of mind.' 
But you take a different risk -- the chance of not meeting your financial objectives," says Roger Hertog, executive vice president of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co., a New York money manager. 

   For the fact is that stocks have chalked up a good record. 
Over the 62 years for which records are available, they have far outperformed bonds and short-term money funds. 
In the 1926-87 period, stocks delivered an average annual return, including dividends, of 9.9%, far outpacing the 4.9% for bonds and the 3.5% for money funds. 
After subtracting 3% average inflation, stocks' real return of 6.9% dwarfs the 1.9% for bonds and 0.5% for money funds. 
Such comparisons, of course, ignore the consequences if an investor has an unfortunate knack for picking losing stocks. 

   Stocks generally do better than bonds for the same reason some investors now are avoiding them: Their prices fluctuate more. 
In their worst year, 1931, stocks tumbled 43%. 
In their best, 1933, they gained 54%. 
For bonds, the range is less extreme -- from down 8.1% in 1969 to up 44% in 1982. 

   Because stock prices are more volatile, academics say, investors demand a higher return for the greater short-term risk. 
"You get compensated in the long run for bearing that pain in the short run," says Richard Roll, a business professor at the University of California at Los Angeles. 
Even years that are flat on the basis of Dec. 31 to Dec. 31 comparisons can be bumpy for stocks: 1987, with its wild 39% run-up through August and its wild 30% drop in the next three months, finished with a placid 5.2% return for the year. 

   And stocks generally do better for another reason: While other assets, such as bonds and money-market funds, represent a fixed call on assets with a pre-set interest rate, stocks represent everything left over. 
Assuming that the economy continues to expand, stocks should keep growing faster than the fixed claims. 

   The consensus on Wall Street is that the long-term pattern will repeat itself. 
Even at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., which currently is bearish, strategist Steven Einhorn says, "It would be a mistake, unless the outlook is outlandishly bad for stocks, for investors to be completely out of the market. 
Over very long periods of time, stocks do better than bonds and cash." 

   Aware of stocks' built-in advantage, pension funds, the largest institutional investors, generally put more of their assets into them than into other investments. 
The $28 billion pension fund of American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., for example, has 50% of its assets in stocks, 25% in bonds, 15% in real estate and 10% in other vehicles. 
Robert Angelica, AT&amp;T's director of pension investments, says that "over the long term, stocks tend to do very well" -- compared not only with bonds and money funds but also with inflation-driven wage increases, which raise pension costs. 

   The disrepute into which stocks have fallen leaves some investment professionals spluttering in frustration. 
"I think it's ridiculous for an investor not to have some money in stocks," says Vanguard Group Chairman John Bogle. 

   Vanguard and other mutual-fund groups' stock-fund sales have nearly dried up. 
Investors fleeing the market have sought havens in bonds and money-market funds; assets of one money fund, the Vanguard Prime Portfolio, have increased 56% to $6.1 billion in the past year. 
But meanwhile, stocks have rebounded 22%, including dividends, since last Dec. 1. 
Bruce Johnstone, a managing director of Fidelity Investments Inc., says, "It's a shame that people feel so burned by 1987." 

   However, the short-term swings make it too risky to put all your money in stocks. 
Kurt Brouwer, a San Francisco consultant, advises people to keep three to six months' living expenses in a bank or money fund in case they lose their job or face unexpected expenses. 
He adds that they should also buy health and life insurance before making longer-term investments. 

   And even money that won't be needed for five or 10 years or until retirement shouldn't all be in stocks. 
For one thing, bonds and money funds can help smooth out an investment portfolio's total value in the face of violent stock-market plunges. 
For another, history may not repeat itself in the future, and stocks may not outperform alternative investments. 

   A minority of experts believe just that. 
They include Ravi Batra, a best-selling prophet who predicts "The Great Depression of 1990" based on a less-than-rigorous analysis of business and social cycles. 
Mr. Batra, an economics professor, says "the worst economic crisis in history," lasting "at least seven years," is "inevitable" because of cycles of social change, money growth, inflation and government regulation. 
He recommends that investors sell their stocks after mid-1989, when he predicts another crash, cash in their individual retirement accounts and start buying gold and silver coins and stocks of gold-mining companies. 

   The worriers also include Stanley Salvigsen, formerly the chief investment strategist at Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. Mr. Salvigsen says the historic return data for 1926-87 include a 40-year period when rising inflation and interest rates hurt bond returns. 
He says the rock-bottom stock prices of the 1930s also make stock-return calculations look unusually good because the subsequent price increases were from such low levels. 

   "Just don't take those numbers and throw them around too loosely," warns Mr. Salvigsen, now the chairman of Comstock Partners Inc., a money-management firm. 
He expects bonds to outperform stocks over the next several years because he believes that inflation is going to fade and interest rates will drop to the lower levels that prevailed earlier in the century. 

   A recent analysis by Martin Leibowitz of Salomon Brothers Inc. also raises questions about whether the 1926-87 pattern will continue. 
He has devised a computer model projecting a surprisingly high 32% chance that bonds would beat stocks over any future 10-year period. 
Even after 20 years, the chance remains 25%. 
By comparison, stocks have beaten bonds in 42 of 53 10-year periods since 1926. 

   However, Mr. Hertog of Sanford C. Bernstein disagrees. 
"Every cycle has its Cassandras, and they've almost always been wrong," he scoffs. 
"They say, 'Yes, I know about 1926-87, but now it's different.' 
When World War II ended, some people predicted another depression because we had all these guys coming back from the war, what were they going to do?" 

   Mr. Hertog and most others say that as long as the economy continues to grow at something like its rate during this century, stocks will probably beat bonds over the long haul. 
But even if they're right, the historical return patterns are hardly a foolproof guide. 

   Exactly when you buy makes a big difference. 
Investors who put money in the stock market in 1929 and 1930 were still sitting with losses 10 years later. 
Those who got in during 1965 had an annual average 10-year return of a paltry 1.24%. 
The best decade was 1949-58, with an annual rate of 20%. 
The 1978-87 decade, at more than 15%, was far above average. 

   Periods of stock-market overvaluation are easy to spot -- in hindsight. 
Everyone now agrees that stocks were overpriced in August 1987, when the price-earnings ratio for stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. 500 index topped 23 times the past-12-month earnings, compared with a historical norm of 13. 
Now, that ratio has returned to about 12. 

   But the whopping pre-crash P/E ratio was in anticipation that 1988 would see the biggest surge in corporate profits in 40 years -- thanks to lower tax and interest rates; huge bank write-offs, which somewhat depressed corporate profits last year, and the falling dollar, which boosted U.S. companies' foreign sales. 
This year, per-share earnings for the S&amp;P 500 index are expected to rise about 35%. 

   So, it's hard to know exactly when to stay out and when to get back in. 
Because the market swings so suddenly, staying out for just a few quarters can deprive you of almost all the advantage of owning stocks. 
Even pros regularly fail at darting in and out of the market. 
So, individuals probably should stay in the market to the degree that they are willing to take the risk. 

   For them, the main questions are: How much risk do you want to take? 
How many 30% drops can you stand to earn the extra five percentage points annually over the long term? 
Some people can be comfortable with 80% of their assets in stocks. 
Others may shudder at only 20%. 

   Mr. Lambert, the real-estate executive who is getting out of stocks, says he would rather have money invested in assets over which he has more control. 
"I have a lot of confidence in the American system and capitalism," he says. 
"But we all have to worry about our own nest, and I'd rather grow my nest at a slower rate and control my risks wherever possible." 

   That aversion to risk is natural, comments Mr. Hertog of Sanford C. Bernstein, who adds, "The pleasure we derive from a gain is less than the pain we feel at a comparable loss." 
Investing in bonds or money-market funds may insure against big short-term losses, he adds, "but you pay for the insurance" by acquiescing in potentially lower returns. 

   Younger people with few financial responsibilities may be comfortable with stocks. 
As they age, have children, buy houses, pay tuitions and medical bills or approach retirement, they typically become more conservative. 
Laurence Siegel, the managing director of Ibbotson Associates Inc. in Chicago, says that people tend to invest most heavily during their 40s and 50s and spend the proceeds after they reach age 65. 
That, he says, gives them a horizon of 25 years or so -- long enough to expect stocks to beat bonds. 

   Instead of individual stocks, what mainly determines how investors fare is their mix of asset categories -- how much is in stocks, in bonds, in real estate, and so forth. 
One simple way of keeping a pre-set mix of stocks and bonds is to send checks regularly to a so-called balanced mutual fund, a mixture of stocks and fixed-income investments. 
That way, you don't have to keep switching investments to rebalance several mutual funds in the target mix. 

   One of the largest such funds, the $1.5 billion Wellington Fund, tries to keep 65% in stocks and 35% in bonds. 
The bonds caused Wellington to lag behind the roaring stock market slightly over the past three years, but they saved investors some heartburn when they cushioned the fund against the Oct. 19 crash. 
Other funds have other mixes, and many adjust their mixes to their forecasts of market conditions. 

   Some advisers who recommend asset mixes do so with little regard to past or expected returns. 
Bailard Biehl &amp; Kaiser, a financial-planning firm in San Mateo, Calif., suggests a "fixed mix" -- 20% each in stocks, bonds, cash, foreign stocks and real estate. 
One reason, says Larry Biehl, a director: "It's doable. 
If you can divide by five, it takes eight minutes." 

   Even a rigidly mechanical approach may be better than a haphazard one. 

   "Individual investors should spend time concerning themselves with their own particular objectives and their own risk preference," says George Russell Jr., a Tacoma, Wash., consultant who advises blue-chip pension funds. 
"Instead, they usually spend time listening to presentations about a particular financial product." 

   One problem is that many brokers and financial planners earn the most by selling mutual funds with sales commissions or packaged, similarly high-commission investments such as partnerships or insurance. 
Surprisingly, however, many investment pros see little need to own individual stocks -- except for people who crave the casino-style action of trying to pick winners and losers themselves. 
All too often, such investors pay brokerage commissions in exchange for this "entertainment." 

   Mr. Brouwer, the San Francisco consultant, believes that only people with more than $2 million need venture outside mutual funds. 
Even then, he says, they should leave stock-picking to an outside adviser unless they want to devote themselves full time to following the ups and downs of dozens of companies. 

   Making regular, automatic contributions to a mutual fund helps avoid worry about what the market is doing minute to minute. 
Plenty of brokers, newspapers and magazines are happy to sell the notion that people should change their investment tactics in response to current events. 
But that can lead to chasing what did best recently -- the pattern that drew many people into stocks after the 39% increase last year and just before the crash. 

   Now, however, Fidelity's Mr. Johnstone believes that the market's return to earth heralds a return to what he calls "normal times," with stock gains averaging 10% annually instead of the 20% in the 1982-87 bull market. 
He adds: "The likelihood of a big killing in a short period of time, those days are probably over." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
