ID: 261	RANK: 53	SCORE: 7.863209
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881021-0193 </DOCNO>
<HL> Board of Contributors: Hurrah for the L-Word </HL>
<AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   I write as an unrepentant, unreconstructed, unregenerate and unabashed liberal who wonders why so many of his fellow citizens have allowed themselves to be gulled by the Republicans into regarding what Ronald Reagan archly calls "the l-word" as the greatest menace to the republic since the fluoridation of water. 
These same fellow citizens, when asked to name the 20th-century presidents they most admire, generally come up with Franklin Roosevelt, Harry Truman and John Kennedy. 
What in the world do they think Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy were? 
Conservatives? 

   Some Republicans do astonishingly insist that they were conservatives. 
In a genial debate we had the other day in Bakersfield, Calif., Pierre (alias Pete) du Pont IV claimed that FDR was the hero of the "conservative majority" of his day. 
He then went on to denounce me as a socialist. 
One could not help recalling that Pierre du Pont III joined with other members of the family half a century ago to finance the American Liberty League, an organization of rich reactionaries dedicated not to the celebration of Franklin Roosevelt but to denouncing him -- as a socialist. ("The American Liberty League," Jim Farley said at the time, "ought to be called the American Cellophane League. . . . 
First, it's a du Pont product and second, you can see right through it.") 

   Let the record read: Franklin Roosevelt was a liberal, and proud of it, and his New Deal created modern America. 
When FDR came to Washington in 1933, unrestrained capitalism, the unregulated market and the unchecked rule of the rich had brought our capitalist democracy to the brink of disaster. 
There was no old-age insurance, no unemployment compensation, no guarantee of bank deposits, no farm price supports, no federal regulations of the securities exchanges. 
The conservative leaders of the country had been too busy taking care of the rich to think of the rest of the American people. 

   In fact, they were fulfilling the old prediction of Karl Marx that capitalism would be destroyed by its own contradictions. 
Their laissez-faire policies were plunging the republic into depression and class war. 
Nor has capitalism triumphed over Karl Marx in the years since by fidelity to laissez faire and devil-take-the-hindmost. 
It has triumphed because of the long campaign mounted by liberals in the teeth of envenomed conservative resistance to reduce the suffering, and thereby the revolutionary passions, of those to whom accidents of birth or fortune deny an equal chance in life. 

   Karl Marx failed to foresee the ability of democratic governments to show a sense of social responsibility. 
Those who would now have government abandon social responsibility in the name of unbridled individualism are doing Marx's work for him. 

   What Franklin Roosevelt did was to rescue capitalism from the capitalists. 
By humanizing the economic order and giving the poor a stake and a chance in the American system, he renewed and revitalized democracy. 

   It was liberal leadership that gave the American people Social Security -- over the intense opposition of the Republicans. 
Liberal leadership gave workers the right to organize in unions of their own choosing. 
Fifty years ago, liberal leadership established a minimum wage (of 25 cents an hour) -- and the Republicans fought just as hard against it then as they fought (alas, successfully) this month against a bill to raise the minimum wage beyond a paltry $3.35 an hour. 

   Those terrible liberals, who the president and vice president tell us have ruined America, equipped the economy with built-in economic stabilizers and social safety nets that have saved us from a major depression for half a century. 
Before the New Deal the U.S. went through a severe depression roughly every 20 years: 1819, 1837, 1857, 1873, 1893, 1907, 1929. 
We have had no serious economic collapse since the Great Depression -- and that is because every tendency toward depression has been contained by the world the New Deal made. 

   This is what American liberalism is all about: economic opportunity, social justice, civil freedom. 
The liberal remaking of America was rooted in the understanding, firmly grounded in our history, that the rich always rule in their own interest. 
"They act," as Orestes Brownson wrote a century ago, "on the beautiful maxim, 'Let the government take care of the rich, and the rich will take care of the poor,' instead of the far safer maxim, 'Let government take care of the weak, the strong can take care of themselves.'" 

   What FDR began, Harry Truman and John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson carried forward. 
"We have rejected the discredited theory that the fortunes of the nation should be in the hands of a privileged few," said Harry Truman. 
"Instead, we believe that our economic system should rest on a democratic foundation and that wealth should be created for the benefit of all. . . . 
Every segment of our population and every individual has a right to expect from his government a fair deal." 

   Now Ronald Reagan has revived the theory that Harry Truman supposed had long since been discredited. 
The countryclub ticket of 1988 is running on that discredited theory today. 
To keep power in the hands of a privileged few, the well-paid Republican propaganda apparatus has distracted the electorate by putting across a caricature of liberalism and blaming liberals for everything that happened to the republic from 1961 till Ronald Reagan rode his white horse into Washington in 1981. 

   In fact, there has not been a liberal administration in Washington since the Great Society vanished into the Vietnam quagmire in 1966. 
Richard Nixon a liberal? 
Gerald Ford a liberal? 
Jimmy Carter, the most conservative Democratic president since Grover Cleveland and almost as assiduous a critic of affirmative government as Mr. Reagan himself, a liberal? 
Someone must be kidding. 
We have not had a liberal administration for more than 20 years. 

   For better or for worse, conservative government and conservative policies are responsible for the present state of the union -- for the harsh fact that the gap between rich and poor is greater today than it has been at any time since the Census Bureau started collecting data on the subject; that the number of poor people has increased by eight million since 1978 and that one-fifth of the children of the republic are today living in poverty; that the national debt has nearly trebled since 1981; that what was once the world's leading creditor nation has been transformed into the world's leading debtor nation and that our real estate, banks, industrial base and national economic policy are increasingly in hock to foreigners; that corruption is rampant in both public and private sectors; that our schools and cities and environment and housing and health care and highways and dams and bridges and tunnels are in decay; that a reckless and duplicitous foreign policy has gravely reduced international confidence in the U.S. 

   This is where government by the rich for the rich has landed us. 
The Republicans this time around are trying, with some apparent success, to divert the country from serious issues by demanding a compulsory Pledge of Allegiance to the flag (written in fact by a socialist) and reviling the American Civil Liberties Union (an organization dedicated to the Bill of Rights of the Constitution) and lamenting the Massachusetts furlough system (instituted not by Michael Dukakis but by his Republican predecessor). 

   But the Republican caricature of liberalism has nothing to do with what Roosevelt and Truman, Kennedy and Johnson were all about -- and what Michael Dukakis is all about today. 
What liberalism is all about is to recall a generous-spirited people to its better self -- to remind us that we are all members one of another and that the conservative philosophy of cosseting the rich and devil-take-the-hindmost is not only ignoble but, as past generations have bitterly learned, self-destructive, breeding economic depression, class conflict and moral squalor. 

   The presidents we admire and celebrate most -- Jefferson and Jackson and Lincoln and Theodore Roosevelt and Wilson and FDR and Harry Truman and JFK -- were all, in the context of their times, vigorous and unashamed liberals. 
They were all pioneers on new frontiers, seeking out the ways of the future, meeting new problems with new remedies, carrying the message of constructive change in a world that never stops changing. 
From the start of the republic liberalism has always blazed the trail into the future -- and conservatism has always deployed all the weapons of caricature and calumny and irrelevance to conceal the historic conservative objective of unchecked rule by those who already have far more than their fair share of the nation's treasure. 

   The conservatives have got away with this kind of campaign before, and they may well get away with it in 1988. 
The republic will very likely pay a fearful price for succumbing once again to conservative cynicism and conservative guff. 

   ---
   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
