ID: 261	RANK: 55	SCORE: 7.815305
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871112-0128 </DOCNO>
<HL> Dollar Devaluation May Be Smoot-Hawley of '87
---
By Alfred L. Malabre Jr.</HL>
<DD> 11/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   In striving to avoid any repetition of the great policy blunders of the 1930s, planners in Washington may inadvertently be repeating one of the greatest. 

   It's a situation, in fact, that would well have suited Thomas Hobson, the 17th-century Englishman whose name remains synonymous with unappetizing choices. 

   Between 1929 and 1933, the Federal Reserve allowed the money supply to drop by about one-third, a decline that many economists, in retrospect, believe deepened and prolonged the economic slump, which began around the time of the 1929 stock-market crash. 

   Now, in the wake of last month's even more precipitous market crash, the Fed has clearly indicated that it will take every step to avoid a repetition of the 1929-33 monetary contraction. 
The message is that the money spigot, if necessary, will be turned open wide. 

   A consequence of this understandable strategy, however, is that it tends coincidentally to reduce the dollar's international value -- whatever level Washington's policy makers, including President Reagan, may proclaim appropriate for the currency. 
And this, in turn, poses problems reminiscent of those created in the 1930s with the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act. 

   Enacted in 1930, the legislation is widely blamed, along with the monetary squeeze, for turning a recession that began around the time of the 1929 crash into something far worse. 
It raised import duties in most major industries, particularly in minerals, chemicals, dyestuffs and textiles. 

   It was enacted over objections from the American Bankers Association and a group of 1,028 leading economists, whose warnings proved correct. 
Within two years of the signing, 25 other nations set up retaliatory tariffs, international trade shriveled and the slump deepened. 

   With this background more keenly in mind in the wake of last month's market crash, today's political leaders, many of whom espoused increased protectionism before the latest crash, now seem far less inclined in that direction. 
If rising trade barriers turned a recession into a depression in the 1930s, they reason, history must not be allowed to repeat itself through the enactment of highly protectionist measures now. 

   Despite the best laid plans of policy makers, however, history has a stubborn tendency to repeat itself anyway. 
The trick is that the repetition often comes in a different way, so that it's difficult to discern. 
And this, unhappily, may be precisely such an occasion. 

   The "Smoot-Hawley" of 1987 may turn out to be, in retrospect, the debasement of the international value of the American dollar -- a development that Washington's planners by and large appear to regard benignly. 

   The fact isn't widely recognized, it would seem, but such a fall in the international worth of a nation's currency -- as in the dollar's case, to well below any reasonable estimate of its actual global purchasing power -- is tantamount to throwing up trade barriers. 
The main distinction is that the protectionism is subtler. 
But the ultimate impact on trade can be fully as devastating. 

   Here's why. 
Raising tariffs and other such undisguised barriers to trade serve, quite obviously, to make imported items costlier. 
This, in turn, acts to slow a nation's import inflow and strengthen its trade balance -- provided that demand for its exports continues unabated. 

   However, as the experience of the 1930s shows, exports tend eventually to slow as well, as other nations, seeing barriers rising against their own exports, erect similar barriers themselves against imports. 
In the end, world trade shrinks, tending to depress economic activity all around. 

   This chain of events, however, can just as easily be used to describe the possible impact of a sharp decline in the dollar's international value. 
A falling dollar tends to slow imports, making them costlier for Americans. 
This will strengthen the country's trade balance, provided that export demand is unaffected, and so on and so on. 
If it sounds familiar, it is. 

   The only question is whether other nations, as they did in the 1930s, will retaliate in kind -- which within the present context would mean trying to force down the worth of their own particular currencies in a series of so-called competitive devaluations. 
The upshot of any such strategy on international trade would be tantamount -- shades of Smoot-Hawley -- to all sides erecting tariff barriers. 

   The hope in Washington, apparently, is that in policy centers abroad the dollar's decline will be allowed at the least to stand, and that the U.S. trade balance will indeed improve, as imports, now costlier for Americans, diminish and exports, now cheaper for foreigners, expand. 

   Will this actually happen? 
No one knows, but the experience of the 1930s isn't heartening. 

   Most other major industrial nations suffer far higher rates of joblessness than the U.S., and most depend far more heavily than the U.S. on exports, which of course a shrunken dollar tends to restrict. 

   A few statistics: Unemployment, at about 6% of the labor force in the U.S., comes to roughly 11% of the labor force in France and Belgium, 10% in Britain and the Netherlands, 9% in Canada and 7% in West Germany. 
Among the major countries, only the Japanese rate of about 3% is lower than in the U.S. 
And exports, which amount to some 10% of overall economic activity in the U.S., generally make up far larger percentages abroad -- for instance, about 25% in West Germany, 20% in Britain and 15% in Italy. 

   Stimulative policies abroad, designed to pick up any slack in exports with increased domestic demand, would surely help to ease pain caused by a shrunken dollar, at least in the short run. 
And there is some recent evidence that a few nations are moving, albeit gingerly, in this direction. 

   Still, significant policy shifts of this nature abroad seem highly uncertain. 
And for some understandable reasons. 

   These include a very reasonable concern in some foreign capitals that too much stimulation could rekindle inflation, which still stirs bitter memories in such countries as West Germany, whose economy was ravaged by inflation in the early 1920s. 

   Even if other countries were to stimulate their economies strongly, as Washington wishes, their currencies in the process could well tend to weaken, which in turn would frustrate Washington's hope of improving the trade balance through a sharply lower dollar. 

   Moreover, there's a sense abroad that, even after last month's market crash, Washington's planners continue to shy away from remedies -- such as a major reduction in the federal budget deficit -- that seem fundamental but would doubtless entail more political courage, and more voter pain, than simply opening the money spigot and letting the dollar fall. 

   In any case, from a Washington viewpoint, too large a cut in the budget deficit -- presumably through reduced federal spending and increased taxes -- could sharply slow overall economic activity, which has already been staggered by the market crash. 
Indeed, some economists regard such a strategy as uncomfortably similar -- a sort of fiscal counterpart -- to the strategy that led to the monetary crunch of 1929-33, the other great blunder of the depression years. 

   As we said, it's a predicament that would have suited Thomas Hobson. 

   ---
   Mr. Malabre is a Journal news editor and author of "Beyond Our Means," recently published by Random House. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
