ID: 261	RANK: 56	SCORE: 7.802982
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871023-0125 </DOCNO>
<HL> Reagan Risks
Being 'Hoovered'
By Democrats
---
By Paul A. Gigot</HL>
<DD> 10/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TAXES
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   At the White House this week, much of the talk was about "the Hoover analogy." 
Amid Monday's market bedlam, the White House issued a statement with the soothing assertion that "the underlying economy remains sound." 
Mr. Reagan later walked onto the South Lawn and threw gasoline on the irony by saying, "There is nothing wrong with the economy . . . all the indices are up." 

   Hearing this and wincing, a senior aide who didn't draft the statement rushed to find President Hoover's remarks following the 1929 crash and quickly sent a copy to chief of staff Howard Baker. (President Hoover had said that "the fundamental business of the country . . . is on a sound and prosperous basis.") 

   "I found the parallel uncanny," said the White House aide. 
"I thought, some reporter is going to pick up on this." 

   As it happens, the Hoover analogy may be the cold water that rouses the Reagan administration from its final-term, lameduck retreat. 
With talk of Hoovernomics in the air, the conventional White House wisdom that the strong and enduring economic recovery would carry Republicans to victory in 1988 is in tatters. 
The strategy of accommodating Congress on trade and other items also looks forlorn, given the impetus the crash gives the Democrats to try to repudiate the Reagan legacy. 

   The president obviously needs to reassert his leadership, and this week several aides were saying the way to do it is to reassert his agenda, especially on the core economic issues of the budget and taxes. 
Their view of Hoover's legacy is that it wasn't the 1929 crash that produced recession and Republican rout. 
Hoover's mistake, they believe, was in allowing the political pressure that followed in the wake of the crash to intimidate him into abandoning the low-tax, low-tariff policies of the prosperous 1920s. 

   "I don't believe this president is going to accommodate all this pressure to reverse his policies," said Gary Bauer, assistant to the president for domestic policy, "I think we should demand immediately that the Democrats take the tax bill and trade bill off the agenda to calm the markets." 

   This is not what most people in the Beltway have in mind when they talk about Hoover. 
Conventional wisdom already casts the president as the man who caused the crash because of his low-tax policies. 
The Washington Post's Hobart Rowen, a bellweather Cassandra for most of the Reagan presidency, could barely contain his pride in vindication in asserting that the private markets ached for a tax rise. 

   "In a sense, it was the Reagan Revolution come full circle," he wrote Wednesday. 
"The first priority must be reduction of the budget and trade deficits . . . . 
And that will require that Reagan abandon his nearly psychotic aversion to any tax increase. . . ." (Mr. Rowan didn't say, if psychoanalysis could also explain why the market had risen for five years.) 

   Mr. Rowan and allies smelled victory in the president's decision to listen to congressional deficit proposals that included new taxes. 
Senate Budget Chairman Lawton Chiles, who hasn't been able to get his own committee to agree on more than token budget cuts all year, called it "very, very good news." 

   They may yet be surprised, however, at what the president means by negotiations to cut the deficit. 
Tax increases will be far from the only thing on the agenda. 
Indeed, by later in the week aides were saying that if the president were to make concessions on taxes, then the Democrats would have to provide more than just another promise to cut spending; they'd have to provide guarantees, for example, of the kind that would come with the enhanced spending-recision authority co-sponsored by Sens. 
William Proxmire (D., Wis.) and William Armstrong (R., Colo.) 

   "The president got burned once before," said one official, referring to the first-term episode when the president agreed to a tax increase but Congress reneged on spending cuts. 
"So this time there are going to be assurances, or there's no deal." 

   In the Senate, meanwhile, Republican Phil Gramm was confident he could gather 34 signatures on a "Dear Mr. President" letter that promises to sustain a veto of any free-spending bill. 
Several prominent Republicans are advocating a similar effort toward the trade bill, a 1,000-page protectionist monster now making its way through a House-Senate conference. 
Having demanded a budget summit and presidential action so vociferously, congressional Democrats may yet find themselves locked into a poker game with a president who still has the clout to enforce a veto. 

   That will depend, of course, on whether the stock-market crash has so intimitated the White House it believes compromise is now always preferable to a veto. 
White House officials are saying this week that they are not intimidated, but a good test of that resolve will be how much the president decides to accept in return for compromising on taxes. 

   In official Washington, of course, the political pressure will be intense for the president to give in, to "compromise" for its own sake, regardless of the consequences. 
Democrats can be expected to press the tax and trade issues with particular intensity; they can safely assume that whatever their own role in encouraging recession might eventually be, the party that sits in the White House will always be held most responsible by the voters. 

   In his justly famous book on the Great Depression, economic historian Charles Kindleberger lays much of the blame for the collapse on the failure of leadership. 
He blames Hoover for, among other things, caving to the political pressure caused by the stock-market crash and deflation and signing the Smoot-Hawley Tariff in 1930. 
"To manage pressure is to govern; to let pressures run wild is to abdicate," Mr. Kindleberger writes, "Hoover and the United States abdicated." 
That's one Hoover analogy worth keeping in mind. 

   ---
   Mr. Gigot is a member of the Journal's editorial board. 

   (Revised WSJ Oct. 26, 1987)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
