ID: 261	RANK: 59	SCORE: 7.688052
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870615-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> Japan Needs to Relax Its Monetary Policy
---
By Lewis W. Bernard</HL>
<DD> 06/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> JAPAN
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Japan's economic might has become the envy of the world. 
The yen has been the strongest international currency for the past two years, and as a result, the capitalization of the Japanese stock market has risen beyond that of the U.S., making it the world's largest. 
Japan has also become the largest creditor nation, amassing foreign assets that exceed external liabilities by some $200 billion. 

   But for all its economic and financial muscle, Japan remains dangerously vulnerable in two important respects. 
First, because the nation has no modern memory of severe recession or depression, the Japanese have no experience in dealing with the potentially devastating consequences of severe economic contraction. 

   Japan escaped the Great Depression in the 1930s. 
Indeed, from 1929 to 1935, when economic activity in most Western nations plummeted, industrial output in Japan rose 50%. 
Moreover, since the end of World War II, there has been only one recession in Japan -- a brief contraction in 1974. 
This spectacular record of economic success encourages the Japanese to make policy choices based on the view that their economy is immune to economic contraction. 

   Second, the Japanese are uncomfortable dealing with the complexities of financial interrelationships in a free market because their own financial system is controlled administratively by the Ministry of Finance. 
This inexperience in gauging the full range of market reactions to alterations in policy variables, such as the discount rate, has prevented the Japanese from utilizing fully all the monetary policy tools at their disposal to influence domestic demand and the foreign-exchange value of the yen. 

   Meanwhile, the soaring yen, with its adverse effects on Japanese trade and economic activity, has made currency stabilization a top priority for the government of Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone. 
But the two shortcomings noted above -- a disregard for the potential impact of recessions and a disinclination to use monetary policy adjustments to combat currency appreciation -- raise the distinct possibility that Japan might adopt a yen-stabilization policy that actually could push its economy into recession. 

   To deal with this currency problem, the Japanese have announced that they intend to ease fiscal policy, mainly through increasing expenditures on public works and housing. 
While this more accommodative fiscal policy would tend to stimulate economic growth and thereby lower the trade surplus, it also would raise the Japanese budget deficit and the level of real interest rates in Japan. 
Thus, as the U.S. discovered in 1983 and 1984, fiscal stimulus unaccompanied by monetary relaxation is more likely to boost the value of the local currency than to curb it. 

   To avoid that outcome Japan must adopt other measures to weaken the yen. 
Normally, when Western nations wish to depreciate their currencies they lower interest rates by easing monetary policy. 
This would seem like a sensible course of action for Japan given the current tightness of Japanese monetary policy as evidenced by the flatness of the yen yield curve (overnight interest rates in Japan are about 3 1/2%, a little above the yield on the 10-year Japanese benchmark government bond) and by the disinflationary pressure in the economy, where consumer prices are no higher than they were a year ago and producer prices are 6% below 1986's level. 

   Despite the evidence to the contrary, the Japanese do not perceive their monetary policy as being tight. 
Indeed, their concern is that excessive liquidity is fostering an explosion in property values around Tokyo and a speculative frenzy in the stock market. 

   Neither of these developments, however, is principally liquidity-driven. 
The escalation of property values reflects largely the restructuring of the Japanese economy and the resultant migration of workers toward financial service centers such as Tokyo, while the stock boom results from Japanese savers, encouraged by the continuous appreciation of the yen, investing heavily in their own stock market instead of assuming a currency risk and investing in foreign equity markets. 

   This erroneous belief in a liquidity-driven price boom, together with the inexperience and discomfort of the Japanese in relying on a flexible monetary policy, seems to be precluding the Bank of Japan from stabilizing the yen by relaxing monetary policy. 
Indeed, this view is reinforced by the reaction of the market to Prime Minister Nakasone's statement in Washington last month that Japan would cut short-term interest rates. 
At first U.S. interest rates fell in anticipation of a monetary easing in Japan, but after reflection, market participants concluded that a meaningful relaxation of policy was unlikely and interest rates retreated to their previous levels. 

   There are reports that Japan intends to stabilize the yen not by easing monetary policy but by administratively slashing the real volume of its already shrinking trade surplus. 
That is, the government would dictate, perhaps on a company-by-company basis, the extent to which exports must decline and imports increase. 
Such actions surely would depress the yen and provide some degree of relief from the currency for those companies not directly affected by the administrative actions. 
But these measures could also push the already weak Japanese economy, with its declining trade surplus and deteriorating domestic demand, into recession. 

   Given the importance of Japan in today's tightly integrated global economy, such a development could have far-reaching consequences for other nations. 
The Japanese stock market, which has risen more then 50% in the past year, would surely crash, since its current elevated price-earnings ratio of about 63, compared with roughly 17 for the U.S., would appear to be based primarily on a firm conviction that Japan will experience continuous economic growth without setbacks. 

   If the magnitude of the Japanese stock market crash were sufficiently large, the yen would be weakened appreciably, as the Japanese tried to move vast blocks of capital into foreign markets. 
But even as stock prices abroad initially moved higher as a result, the shock of observing the world's most acclaimed economy stripped of capital and sliding deeper into recession could create a major crisis of confidence in all industrial nations. 
This, together with disruptions in the global interbank market caused by increased bankruptcies, could lead to world-wide recession. 

   What should be done to avert such a disaster? 
We can only hope that the Japanese, who so far have taken limited steps in deregulating their financial system, can be coaxed into relying on market forces to stabilize the yen through a relaxation of monetary policy. 
Such an action would both stimulate domestic demand in Japan and curb the strength of the yen. 
Monetary relaxation, therefore, would steer Japan away from recession and help to prevent a potentially cataclysmic adjustment in global financial markets. 

   ---
   Mr. Bernard is a managing director of Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. 
He acknowledges the assistance of John Paulus, also a managing director of Morgan Stanley, in the preparation of this article. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
