ID: 261	RANK: 63	SCORE: 7.537229
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881110-0116 </DOCNO>
<HL> On Looking Out From the Oval Office </HL>
<AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   I'm pretty sure, dear reader, that you've heaved a sigh of relief that our interminable and dreary presidential campaign is over, even if your man didn't win. 
And I'm quite sure that President-elect George Bush is relieved that all the problems of the campaign are now behind him. 
No more worrying about a slip of the tongue or about the fickleness of voters. 

   But whether he realizes it or not, his problems have just begun. 
Once in the Oval Office come next January he can no longer temporize on the issues of the day, hide behind fuzzy words. 
Thereafter he must make decisions that have consequences, both for him and for the rest of us. 
As president, Mr. Bush deserves our sympathy. 

   Indeed, his problems begin even before the inauguration. 
Between now and mid-January he must put together a working government. 
That means he must select a cabinet, from secretary of the interior to secretary of defense, and choose the people to fill numerous other posts from the independent agencies to the White House staff. 

   You might think that for a new administration with a tenure of four years that would be easy. 
That the president need only ask and those asked will accept. 

   The task is not so simple. 
As Lincoln found out, every appointment creates one ingrate and a score of disgruntled who aren't asked. 
As John Kennedy lamented between his election and inauguration, "Everybody wants to be secretary of state" and shies from lesser offices. 
Moreover, every appointment will bring cries from his opponents of why him or her, just as during the campaign each candidate raised a puzzlement with his choice for vice president. 
Did Michael Dukakis pick Lloyd Bentsen, a man who differed with him on many issues, mainly to help the ticket in Texas? 
Did Mr. Bush choose the relatively unknown Dan Quayle in hope of appealing to younger voters? 

   So it will be now with the new president's appointees. 
Presumably, the Senate will confirm all his cabinet choices, but not before Senate committees have held hearings to grill them all, lay bare their past and expose them to unkind questions from political opponents. 

   Another of President Kennedy's laments about the interval between election and inauguration was that he had "no time to think." 
And president-elect Bush will have much he ought to be thinking about. 

   Begin with the budget. 
President Reagan will have submitted his own budget for the next year, but he's a lame duck soon to retire to California. 
The new president must submit his own emendations and amendments. 
What they will be we have little idea, since neither candidate was very specific about what changes he would advocate. 
Perhaps neither knew. 
But now it must be thought upon in specific terms. 

   There are those, I know, who think the huge budget deficits don't matter too much. 
But I think President Reagan had it right eight years ago when he likened the government to a family that could go a long time on borrowed money but eventually it would catch up with them. 
Trouble was, Mr. Reagan forgot his own warning and Congress did worse. 

   In any event, President-elect Bush is going to have to make some hard choices on the spending side and/or taxes regardless of what he suggested on the campaign trail. 
No matter what he decides, he'll raise a political firestorm. 

   The budget, in fact, is entangled with many other excruciating decisions the new president will have to make. 
On defense, for example. 
What kind of military defense do we need? 
What balance between atomic weapons and so-called "conventional" forces? 
Although both candidates spoke of keeping a "strong defense," neither was very specific on what that should be or how it is to be obtained. 
Once in the White House, the new president will no longer be able to avoid hard and specific decisions. 

   Some examples on how other questions demanding decisions entwine with one another: What should our posture be toward the Soviet Union? 
Do Mr. Gorbachev's "reforms" really change the old adversary relationship or does the Soviet Union still retain all its old ambitions, merely now disguised? 
The new president's evaluation will affect many things from our defense posture to our negotiations on trade, cultural exchange and on further disarmament as in the IMF treaty. 

   Then there's Latin America. 
What can and should we do about Gen. Manuel Noriega in Panama? 
About the Contra-Sandinistas struggle in Nicaragua? 
About Chile, where in a recent plebiscite the people said a resounding "no" to Gen. Augusto Pinochet but the general as yet shows no signs of yielding? 
About El Salvador, Mexico and all that mountain of debt pressing down on the economies of so many Latin American countries? 

   The list of foreign-policy woes facing the new president is almost endless. 
The Persian Gulf, South Africa, the Israeli-Palestinian violence. 
The U.S. cannot avoid having some sort of policy toward all these areas, and deciding what sort of policy is the burden of the new president. 

   So it is, too, with the many other domestic issues talked about so much during the campaign, but so fuzzily, by both the candidates. 
Education, housing, welfare and so forth. 

   Also, if President Bush looks over his shoulder he may see the ghost of Herbert Hoover. 
He, too, was elected in a time of prosperity because the electorate felt good. 
But in 1929, the year after the election, came the big stock-market crash. 
It was followed two years later by the onset of the Great Depression. 
Hoover didn't cause it, but the Depression caused his defeat in 1932. 

   We had our stock market tumble a year ago in October, but as yet there are few signs of a recession, much less a depression. 
Nonetheless, one Nobel-prize-winning economist, France's Maurice Allais, sees "three fundamental analogies with the period which preceded the Great Depression," including the rise of debt and "potential instability in credit mechanisms, that is, financing long-term investments with short-term deposits" in the banking system. 
He urges a general monetary reform. 

   So far the major governments, including our own, have shown little interest. 
At the very least, though, the Hoover experience should haunt the president. 

   In any event, Mr. Bush will find when he arrives in the Oval Office that his view of the world is quite different from what it was on the campaign trail. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
