ID: 261	RANK: 7	SCORE: 12.018503
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880513-0006 </DOCNO>
<HL> Spending It (A Special Report): Getting By --- A Look Back: For All the Hardships of the Depression, Consumers Cut Back, but They Didn't Stop Spending </HL>
<AUTHOR> Gary Putka </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   WHATEVER YOU SAY about the misery of the Great Depression, it has probably been said before. 
It was appalling, cruel and ruinous. 
The human toll -- hunger, widespread homelessness, and 25% unemployment -- scarred the country like nothing since the Civil War. 

   On top of all the physical suffering, the era of deprivation ushered in by the stock market crash of 1929 also represented the first great disillusionment with the American dream of ever-higher consumption, ever-better living standards. 

   Yet, consumerism lived, even if it didn't fill too many champagne glasses. (None legally, anyway, until 1933 when Prohibition was repealed.) 
We got by. 
And some got by better than others. 
How would we get by if the Great Crash of '87 makes good again the stock market's penchant for prediction? 

   "I would say the fall would be greater," says Studs Terkel, author of the Depression-era history "Hard Times," who just travelled through South Dakota, Iowa and Minnesota, and sees the makings of a possible new depression in farm woes and the rash of bank failures. 
These days, he notes, there is "far less family farming and far less living off the land." 

   Peter Temmin, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who has written on the Great Depression, disagrees. 
"We have social welfare programs, and this time there would be the political awareness not to be so laissez faire," he says. 
"It's not that we won't have people selling apples -- we'll just have fewer people selling apples." 

   That the experts disagree on future depressions isn't surprising. 
They disagree on plenty about the last one. 
Historians admit that the cause of the disaster still hasn't been pinned down too well. (The wheat glut of the Twenties? 
Tight money? 
Protectionism? 
Speculative excess? 
Drought? 
Sunspots?) 

   As to the effects, they were uneven. 
One Great Depression hobo in Mr. Terkel's book recalls, "If you were looking for a job at a Standard Oil service station, you had to have a college degree." 

   Perhaps the college grads had figured out where the real money was. 
For while price-adjusted personal consumption collapsed 22% between 1929 and 1933, gasoline sales were up 7%. 

   The number of households with radios also rose. 
So did sales of Ball jars for home canning. 
Madison Avenue struggled through the era pretty well, buoyed by the ascendancy of radio and the needs of consumer goods companies to sell harder. 
Utilities thrived as more people stayed home. 

   Bad as the Depression was, it wasn't the ultimate cataclysm. 
Not a famine. 
Not as bad as they were having it in China, Germany and other parts of Europe at the time. 

   What's more, not everything about the Great Depression was consistent with the tales the hard-timers handed down to their children, the baby boomers. 
We are told for instance, that although times were bad, people stuck together and helped one another out. 
But it's more accurate to say that those who stuck together helped one another -- sometimes. 
Jobless married men and single men by the hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, left homes and dependents, prompted by a mixture of shame and the often-futile hope of finding work. 
They rode the freights and lived rough. 
Many didn't return. 

   In the itinerant camps, the Hoovervilles and hobo "jungles," some remember as much violence and thievery as camaraderie. 
Among those who found work, white workers earned more than black. 
Farmers with a little cash bought up their foreclosed neighbors' property. 

   "Did you find any kindness in the Depression?" 
Mr. Terkel asks in "Hard Times" of Louis Banks, a washroom attendant who hoboed his way through the Depression. 

   "No kindness," replies Mr. Banks. 
Except for a single fellow wanderer, he adds, "everybody else was evil to each other. 
There was no friendships. 
Everybody was worried and sad looking. 
It was pitiful." 

   Escapism is said to have flourished. 
It is often said that people went to the movies to forget their troubles. 
Maybe, but they went in smaller numbers. 
Movie attendance plunged by 50% from 1929 to 1933, as people spent what money they had on food and clothes. 

   What of the 75% of the workers who had jobs? 
Many of them actually became better off during the hard times, as Columbia University historian John A. Garraty points out in a recent book. 

   That's because prices were falling as fast, or faster than, pay. 
Full-time wage earners lost only 1.4% of their purchasing power in the Depression's worst years, 1929 to 1933, and by 1935 took home more deflation-adjusted pay than before the Depression. 
On the farm, where 30% of the population lived when rural hard times began in 1920, life was of course much bleaker: drought, foreclosure, and a sickening 69% plunge in farm prices. 
While people went hungry, farmers burned grain and spilled milk into ditches in efforts to boost prices. 

   Consumers continued to buy, but they lowered their expectations, says Clay McShane of Boston's Northeastern University. 

   Spending fell on almost everything, but it fell the most on big-ticket items. 
Repair and do-it-yourself was in. 
Library use was up, book buying down. 
It was a stay-at-home society. 
Nothing fancy, please. 

   New housing construction was crushed; starts were a tenth of their 1925 level by 1933. 
But consumer outlays for housing, including mortgages, rent and utilities, fell at only two-thirds the overall rate of spending. 
Households spent an astounding 38% more on electricity, while natural gas purchases were up 28%. 
"If you had a job at a utility company, you did pretty well," says Mr. McShane. 

   New-car sales plunged to 1.1 million in 1932 from 4.5 million in 1929. 
But the number of filling stations and repair garages boomed in Muncie, Indiana, where sociologists Robert and Helen Lynd did a classic study of the period. 
The Lynds called gasoline sales, rising in the town as well as everywhere else, "eloquent testimony to the extent to which (Muncie) clings to the use of its automobiles as a 'necessity' during the Depression." 

   Bicycle shipments went flat momentarily after the Great Crash, then nearly quadrupled by 1936-37. 
Output of washing machines and refrigerators, still novelties, just kept climbing. 
Edibles were sealed away in Ball jars to such an extent that Muncie's Ball family, founders of the home-canning company, added to their horse stock and had plenty of cash to build new riding stables in town, where golf was becoming just a little too middle class for their taste. 

   Mr. McShane, Harvard historian Alan Brinkley, and others predict that the hardest-hit casualties of any sharp slump in the near future would be the service industry, where purchases aren't always for necessities. 
"The McDonald's-style economy would be in trouble," says Mr. McShane. 

   But services held up relatively well in the consumer budget of the Dirty Thirties, off by only 12.6% in real terms from 1929 to 1933, vs. a 27.5% tumble in goods spending. 
Restaurants took in 18% less, spending on medical care fell only 10.7%, and hospital spending was actually up. 

   The advertising industry lost some billings, but wasted no time in exploiting the changed mood. 
Madison Avenue learned quickly that people still wanted to believe they could afford the good life, even if they couldn't. 
Thus, "the image of high society and the wealthy elite" cultivated in Roaring Twenties continued in the Thirties, says Rowan Marchand of the University of California at Davis, and author of "Advertising the American Dream." 

   Listerine toothpaste was the "Dentrifice of the Rich." 
Ponds cold cream made your skin look like the Vanderbilt, Morgan and Astor women. 
Quoth Hoover (the sweepers, not the president) in one ad picturing an aristocrat peering through her lorgnette: "The richest woman in the world can have no finer electric cleaner." 

   But the true stars, Mr. Marchand says, were the agencies that unabashedly played on the insecurities and want of the time. 
"Don't risk your job by offending with B.O.," warned Lifebuoy. 
Gem Clippers related the story of a man thrown out of several jobs and the Social Register. 
The culprit: grubby fingernails. 

   Sally fell behind Barbara in school without her Post bran flakes. 
And an emaciated, naked kid on a scale in the doctor's office wasn't going hungry, of course. 
He was going without his Cocomalt. 

   Cocomalt sales, says Mr. Marchand, defied the Depression, and hit a new record in 1933. 

   ---
   Mr. Putka is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Boston Bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
