ID: 261	RANK: 72	SCORE: 7.271216
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880411-0119 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Outlook: Has 'Next Recession' Passed By? Not Likely </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alfred L. Malabre Jr. </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> ECO </IN>
<DATELINE> CASPER, Wyo.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Is a full-fledged recession to be averted because so many narrow-gauge slumps have already rolled through various sectors of the economy? 
Indeed, is it possible that the much-feared "next recession" -- so fragmented as to escape national notice -- has already come and gone? 

   Would that this proves to be the situation. 
It's a hope that a peripatetic reporter hears increasingly, most recently in this depressed Wyoming community where a flourishing foreclosure business has replaced a flourishing oil business. 

   But the likelihood is otherwise. 
Sectoral slumps in the course of an overall expansion may leave those parts of the economy less vulnerable when a bona fide recession finally does arrive. 
But this hardly means a brave new world where, despite occasional trouble here or there, overall economic activity expands in perpetuum. 

   However dense a pall the news may cast in such still-stricken sites as Casper (pop. 51,000 and dropping) or Anchorage (pop. 173,000) or Houston (pop. 1,594,000), or in such renascent regions as the Rust Belt or the Farm Belt, the business cycle, we submit, lives on. 

   The economy, for better or worse, will surely continue to progress in cyclical fashion, with the inevitable down-phases in the wake of the inevitable up-phases. 
And because -- heretofore at least -- the ups have normally exceeded the downs, the economy's long-term growth has been great indeed. 

   The present expansion, for example, has gone on now for nearly five-and-a-half years, more than four times the duration of the recession that preceded it. 
And most business forecasters divine from their numbers and charts that a general pattern of growth, albeit lackluster, will persist in coming months and, very possibly, right through the rest of this year. 

   But the same majority anticipates the onset of a new downswing in the cycle sometime in 1989. 

   The timing varies, to be sure. 
A Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. forecasting team in New York, for instance, sees a retrenchment of overall activity as early as the first quarter of the year, while across the continent at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles analysts look for a slump to develop no sooner than in next year's second half. 
Whichever estimate proves closest to the mark, there's no sense among the various forecasters that a recession has somehow come and gone and now a new, cycle-free era is at hand. 

   This consensus reflects, for one thing, an appreciation of business-cycle history. 
The record book, which details the economy's ups and downs since the middle of the 19th century, makes clear that sectoral recessions are to be anticipated in the course of cyclical expansions, particularly within such long ones as the latest, whose longevity is fast approaching twice the average for an upswing. 

   A case in point is the 1961-69 expansion, the longest ever, which nonetheless encompassed several rolling recessionary minicycles. 

   In 1965-66, smack amid the record-long expansion, the level of activity within the economy's agricultural sector fell sharply. 
In 1966-67, as agriculture began reviving, expansion stalled in the manufacturing sector, which had been briskly on the rise. 
Still, overall economic activity kept edging up from year to year. 
The 1969-70 recession at last set in in December 1969, after which time most key segments of the economy declined together. 

   As recessions go, the 1969-70 slump was moderate, enduring 11 months, with unemployment peaking at 6.1% of the labor force. 
Perhaps, after so long an expansion, the recession would have proved more severe had the earlier sectoral slowdowns not occurred. 

   And perhaps not. 
The expansionary years of the 1920s, before the onset of the Great Depression in 1929, also were marked by rolling slumps in sectors ranging, reminiscently, from agriculture to oil. 
A little-noted statistic: Crude oil prices, on the steep decline in recent years, fell some 80% in the course of the pre-Depression decade. 

   More than simply business-cycle precedent underlies the sense that, sectoral recessions or not, full-scale slumps will continue in the future as in the past to trail expansions. 
This view reflects as well a recognition that, as overall activity keeps expanding, constraints to growth inexorably must tighten, to a point eventually where further growth becomes impossible and a recession will take hold as difficulty spreads from one sector of the economy to the next. 

   Unfortunately for forecasters, the approach of such restrictive circumstances is seldom clear. 

   Constraints to further expansion may be physical, as when labor or production facilities or key materials grow short, not just here or there but across a broad range of industries. 
Or they may be financial, as when credit for whatever reason becomes scarce or too costly. 
Or they may be, as economists would say, exogenous in nature, an unforeseeable outside "shock" such as a shut-off of Middle Eastern oil or, to speculate ahead, a shut-off of the Japanese-European investment flow. 

   For the present, the economy continues to expand in remarkably unlabored fashion for so aged an upswing. 
Constraints to further growth would no doubt be greater now had the expansion been brisker, had there been no sectoral slumps along the way. 
But this is not to say that old expansions, even ones as sluggish and recession-ridden as this, will roll along indefinitely. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
