ID: 261	RANK: 78	SCORE: 7.154070
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871028-0110 </DOCNO>
<HL> To Weather a Crash,
It Helps a Little
To Be 80 Years Old
---
Veteran Investors Stay Calm,
Having Seen It All Before;
But Watch Out for Sevens
---
By Charles N. Stabler
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN>
<TEXT>
   If Wall Street's younger generation seems more exhilarated than anguished by the stock market's wild ride, how are older and possibly wiser folks reacting? 

   Andrew B. Young was in law school in 1929, the last time this sort of thing happened. 
Today, as a Philadelphia attorney managing trust accounts, he keeps the memory around for guidance. 

   "I saw what was happening to my betters then," he recalls. 
"Every time a stock made a new low, they thought it was a bargain, another opportunity to buy. 
But there were a lot of new lows made on the way down," as the nation slid into what became known as the Great Depression. 

   Nowadays when Mr. Young sees things rising relentlessly, he automatically hedges his bets. 
He sold some stocks when the Dow Jones Industrial Average reached 2000 earlier this year, and more when it hit 2600. 
"If you follow that medicine, you won't get hurt," the 75-year-old lawyer says. 

   Unlike their yuppie counterparts, many of whom got into the stock market about the time it began its long ascent in 1982, investors of Mr. Young's age have known all kinds of markets. 
The speed and the depth of the plunge this time surprised them, to be sure, but a highly informal sampling of the age group indicates no signs of panic. 

   Their experience has generally left them not only with an alert sense of caution but also, somewhat paradoxically, with a certain measure of equanimity. 
That isn't to say, however, that the veterans have all learned the same lessons from their years in the trenches. 

   Reynolds Girdler is 82, and he says he has seen enough years on Wall Street to watch out for those ending in seven. 
Every decade in this century except two, says the Greenwich, Conn., investor, the year ending in seven was a downer. 
When 1987 came along, he was ready. 

   "I am basically a cyclist, and I was convinced 1987 would be a disaster year," says Mr. Girdler, a retired advertising executive. 
"I am mostly invested in short-term Connecticut municipals, because I have to pay the damn tax. 
And some oil stocks that I got so cheap, why not keep them?" 

   Marcy K. Brown, a retired San Francisco engineer, also turned cautious early, but for less exotic reasons. 
He was in the rising market of the early 1970s and saw his gains evaporate during the 40% plunge brought on by Watergate and the Arab oil embargo. 
This time, he made his move in August, the month the market peaked at more than 2700. 

   "It was a feel," he says. 
"The market had moved very high, and there were crazy things going on, like Gap Inc. getting hit so strongly. 
The market seemed touchy." 
Betting on a downturn, he sold most of his over-the-counter stocks. 
Then he bought market-index puts -- the right to deliver "the market" at a price; they rise in value when the market declines. 
He protected his gains in some other stocks by selling call options on them, producing revenue at the risk of missing out on a future rise -- no risk, as it turned out. 

   It was a classic defensive position. 
But nothing is perfect. 
"I had my broker sell the puts too soon," Mr. Brown says. 
"I would have made a mint if I had waited." 

   Some of the veteran investors, especially those with memories of the Depression, are heartened by the quick reaction of the Federal Reserve Board to last week's turbulence. 
The Fed has been pumping money into the economy, in contrast to its credit-tightening policy after the 1929 market crash. 
The idea is to lower interest rates, thus stimulating the economy and offsetting the deflationary effects of the stock-market plunge. 

   But this isn't the whole answer, they warn. 
Interest rates can go to zero without stimulating economic activity if investor confidence is lost. 
That happened during the 1930s, they recall. 

   And if experience can protect an individual, it doesn't seem to do much for the markets in general. 
"We get too soon old and too late smart," says Walter Wriston, the former chairman of Citicorp. 
"While we don't make the same mistake twice, we make different ones." 

   What was different this time, he says, was the incomplete recognition of the global nature of the market, with stock exchanges linked electronically much more closely than during earlier downturns. 
"You get one market making a desperate mistake, like closing Hong Kong," he says, "and all markets react. 
No amount of experience would have helped." 

   But some things don't change. 
The 68-year-old former banker, citing the big money being made until recently by Wall Street's new generation, adds, "When things get ridiculous, you get a reaction." 

   Timing the market holds no interest for many old-timers. 
Their strategy is to buy and hold: Using money you can afford to lose, buy shares in companies with good records and don't sell until you need the money. 
It doesn't always work, and it is certainly less exciting than riding the market roller coaster; but overall, most studies show, it beats getting in and out. 

   It also saves an awful lot of commissions -- and a lot of decision making. 
As Dudley T. Ross, 81, of Walnut Creek, Calif., puts it, "If you get out, then you just have to judge when to get back in." 

   A classic buy-and-hold investor is Irwin Griesse, a retired farmer from Rock Rapids, Iowa, now 87 years old. 
Black Monday cost him a bundle in stock-market gains, but he hasn't sold a share. 
Both the loss and the earlier gains were just "on paper," Mr. Griesse figures. 

   "The corporations are still there, the dividends are good, the economy isn't that bad, so what's the worry?" he asks. 
"Too many people get excited about it. 
Don't know why." 

   Mr. Griesse says the strategy has done well by him. 
He sat through the 1973-74 bear market and then saw investments regain their losses and move to new highs. 
"I don't sell stocks, I buy," he says. 

   So what is the retired farmer doing now, with stocks down nearly 900 points from their peak? 
"Been buying a few," he says. 

   There is one other kind of veteran who isn't dashing madly around to try to adapt to financial tumult. 
John Mack, a 68-year-old retired RCA engineer in Rocky Hill, N.J., is asked how he is coping with the terror of the market these past two weeks. 

   "I refuse to worry about it," replies Mr. Mack, just finishing three sets of doubles in tennis. 
"Other things are more important, like can I get my aching body out on the court again?" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
