ID: 261	RANK: 83	SCORE: 7.108167
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870723-0135 </DOCNO>
<HL> Your Money Matters:
Surviving a Crash: Investors Find Options
Limited for Safe -- and Profitable -- Havens
---
By Cynthia Crossen
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Suppose the stock market lost half its value last week, and right now banks across the country are padlocking their doors. 
And suppose your employer is laying off scores of workers, including you, and the government doesn't seem to be doing anything about it. 
What are you living on? 
Where's your money? 

   The chances of an economic crisis occurring so rapidly are almost nil, most would agree, because of laws restricting speculative excess. 
And the possibility of another Great Depression is equally remote because now there are ways to maintain income, such as Social Security, unemployment insurance and bank deposit insurance. 

   But some analysts believe there's serious economic trouble ahead, and that investors should make safety a top priority in coming months and years. 
Trouble is, these analysts say, few investments are absolutely safe, and none offers both complete safety and an excellent return. 

   An economic crisis would take the form either of deflation, as it did in the Depression, or of inflation, in which the government tries to stimulate the economy by increasing the supply of money. 
In an inflationary crisis, gold will be the safest harbor, many analysts agree. 
"So-called inflation hedges are fine as a store of value, but lousy as a medium of exchange," says Susan Berge Kent, a market analyst at Tucker, Anthony &amp; R.L. Day Inc., Providence, R.I. 
"You can't pull your house apart and use it as currency." 

   Still, to buy gold coins or bullion in anticipation of a financial collapse that could be years away is to sacrifice all income from that investment. 
Furthermore, storing and insuring gold can make it a losing proposition. 
Investors also can buy gold in the form of receipts or certificates, giving them some unallocated portion of a gold pool in a bank vault. 
"But if you're going to use gold as a safety play, you want to be able to get your hands on it quickly," says Richard B. Ross, executive director of the Center for the Study of Investor Behavior in Chicago. 
"So you wouldn't necessarily want to keep it in a bank, because the bank could close in a crisis. 
If the bank is closed, you couldn't even get into your safety deposit box." 

   Historically, gold has been thought of as a universal monetary standard, the one commodity that will retain value anywhere and any time. 
That may not be true now. 
"Everyone knows gold-related investments did well in the '30s," says Robert Prechter, editor of the Elliott Wave Theorist, a stock market newsletter. 
"But that may well have been because the price of gold was fixed. 
While everything else, including commodities, was collapsing across the board, the gold price was fixed by fiat. 
In a free market, the price of gold may go down along with everything else, especially if it starts in the overvalued condition it presently enjoys." 

   In inflationary times, staying liquid -- locking in interest rates for only short periods -- would be crucial. 
So most analysts recommend cash, which means not greenbacks but any financial instrument with a maturity of less than a year. 

   Those instruments can be commercial paper, certificates of deposit or Eurodollar deposits, but most often they're Treasury bills. 
If worried about an economic crisis, an investor should buy a three-month Treasury bill, says Maria Fiorini Ramirez, managing director at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 
"You're 99% sure that you're going to get your principal and interest in three months, and that's about as sure as you're going to get." 
But a three-month bill yields only about 5.70% these days; a 30-year bond yields about 8.70%. 

   If the world economy starts to unravel, however, some analysts say it may not be wise to put much faith in the creditworthiness of the U.S. government. 
"Of all the institutions in the world, the U.S. government isn't the one that's exempt from financial difficulty," says Mr. Prechter. 

   For investors who want to protect $100,000 or less, some analysts recommend short-term certificates of deposit. 
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. insures CDs of as much as $100,000, and most banks have FDIC insurance. 
Whether investing in CDs is the best strategy, however, depends on what form the economic crisis takes and how safe the investor thinks the banking system will be. 

   "In inflationary times, CDs would be deadly," says Mr. Ross. 
"In deflationary times, if you got lucky and had bought at higher rates, you could be making more money. 
But you have to consider to what extent you think the whole banking system is going to go belly up." 

   Then there's also real cash -- greenbacks. 
Ms. Kent recommends that people keep a month's worth of living expenses in cash at home in case their bank closes. 
"That way they can buy food and pay their mortgage, just in case they write a check and nothing happens." 

   Mr. Ross says cash might be valuable in a deflationary time. 
Even so, he says he would take it out of the U.S. 
"You'd want to look for a smallish country with a stable government," he says. 
"If you converted your money to gold or something with tangible value, you could probably live pretty well on a South Sea island." 

   Of course, most analysts don't believe that extreme measures are called for just yet. 
"Realistically, economic crises, even minor ones, don't appear out of the blue," says Mr. Ross. 
"There's typically time to protect yourself. 
You'll pay higher prices then, but in the meantime, you have use of your money for more rational purposes. 
It's foolish to be holding a stack of gold that doesn't earn any interest when you can earn 11%." 

   Paul Erdmann, author of the novel "The Panic of '89," says that in real life he isn't worried about a market crash, but he does think there's a recession on the horizon -- in '89. 
Meanwhile, the former banker says he is investing in the new Dreyfus Strategic Aggressive Investing mutual fund, which capitalizes on the volatility of the market. 
The fund had a gain of 42.41% in the second quarter. 

   When the real trouble begins, Mr. Erdmann says, "the ultimate cliche is always right -- you go to cash," meaning Treasury bills. 
Does Mr. Erdmann think the government will be able to honor all its obligations? 
"I happen to have faith in the government," he says. 
"Yes, even in the American government." 

   There are always people who think they can not only survive disaster but also make money on it. 
In 1979, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co. proposed, in jest, a "Preparing for Armageddon" portfolio. 
In it were stocks of bicycle companies, fishing and gardening equipment companies, rifle manufacturers, do-it-yourself-oriented companies, makers of canned goods -- and a couple of distillers. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
