ID: 261	RANK: 9	SCORE: 10.852345
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871118-0035 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Response of '87: Money and Taxes
---
Panic Isn't Same as Bank Crisis
---
By Barry Eichengreen</HL>
<DD> 11/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   For financial historians, recent events on Wall Street have an eerie familiarity. 
The world-wide economic tremors occurred in October, as did most of the worst financial crises of the 19th and 20th centuries. 
And they began in the U.S., over the past century the industrial nation most subject to destabilizing financial shocks. 

   This country's rich history of crises has made the financial specialist the ambulance chaser of American historians. 
Past historians have listed 1873, 1893, 1907, 1914 and 1929 as examples of U.S. financial crises. 
As always, academics enjoy debating whether each of these episodes should be regarded as a genuine crisis. 
But the debate is sterile without a definition of financial crisis. 
Let us define it as a disturbance of financial markets, marked by falling asset prices and insolvency among debtors and intermediaries, that has ramifications throughout the financial system, destroying the market's capacity to allocate capital. 

   This definition implies a distinction between financial crises on the one hand and panic sales of assets, or bank failures, or debt defaults on the other. 
A financial crisis occurs only when a blockage in one area leads to a systemic seizure. 

   American history shows the critical factor in financial crises has been the linkages running to and from the banking system. 
Qualifying episodes are those in which the banking system has been destabilized, leading to waves of bank failures. 
An isolated failure can give rise to runs on other banks, culminating in a contagion of fear and the collapse of the system. 
Examples of this phenomenon are 1873, 1907, 1930 and 1933. 

   Bank failures are the critical link in the chain not simply because they feed on themselves, magnifying shocks, but because they are so intimately connected to the rest of the economy. 
Banks are a prominent indicator of financial stability and, as Charles Kindleberger and Hyman Minsky emphasize, bank failures can signal a loss of confidence, leading to a collapse of investment. 
Monetary contraction can unleash deflation, leading to debt default as in 1873 and 1893. 
Banks serve as intermediaries between lenders and borrowers and, as Princeton economist Ben Bernanke notes, bank failures lead to disintermediation. 
As banks call in loans, interest rates rise and credit is rationed, as in 1873 and 1907. 
As indebted investors lose access to credit, events spill over into stock and bond markets. 
As indebted firms are pushed into bankruptcy, the crisis spills over into production. 

   Each of these mechanisms is evident in the crisis of 1893. 
That crisis had complex causes, including a series of mercantile bankruptcies and doubts about the gold standard. 
But the spark that set off the conflagration was the failure of a number of prominent Western U.S. banks. 
Significantly, the position of the banks was weak because they were carrying large numbers of non-performing loans to real-estate speculators and unsound enterprises that already should have been written down or written off. 
When panic broke out, confidence in the banking system was already at low ebb. 
After several months of struggle, banks were forced to suspend cash payments nationwide, leading to illiquidity, a stock market crash, and a dramatic fall in economic activity. 
Full-fledged crisis resulted because the banking system was illpositioned to defend itself. 

   In 1890, in contrast, financial difficulties did not culminate in widespread bank failure, and therefore a full-fledged crisis did not result. 
The events of 1890, referred to by O.M.W. Sprague in his classic work on the subject as an episode of financial stringency but not a crisis, were largely a result of the events leading up to the Baring Crisis in Britain. 

   That autumn was marked by many of the other elements of a classic financial crisis. 
As capital stopped flowing to the U.S. from England, banks called in loans, the stock market plunged and commercial bankruptcies ensued. 
But with only an uptick in bank failures, the financial system was able to avoid crisis. 
Two factors contributed. 
First, as the problem originated in Britain, confidence in American banks was not as severely undermined as it was in other instances. 
Second, the U.S. Treasury had ample cash reserves, which it used to buy government bonds, injecting liquidity into the financial system. 

   Even in those cases where bank failures set off genuine crises, and where the economy was powerfully affected (the crisis itself caused an investment volume decline of fully 60% in 1893), the effect was brief. 
Research by Richard Grossman reveals that the trough in investment was typically reached within two quarters, and recovery was complete after four to six. 
The resiliency of the real economy is explained by the resiliency of the financial system. 
Contagions of fear and waves of bank failures certainly could and did occur. 
But stronger banks quickly moved to reinforce their positions. 
Fear dissipated, and waves of bank failures died down, typically within three months of their outbreak. 
Hence the impact on economic activity, while severe, was short-lived. 

   Readers will wonder how 1929 fits into this picture. 
That year is on everyone's mind precisely because the Great Depression was so protracted. 
But it was protracted due not to one but to a succession of financial crises. 
By our definition, the 1929 crash does not qualify as a full-fledged financial crisis. 
The crash undermined confidence and contributed to the collapse of investment, but, except for their exceptionally small number in the second quarter, the rate of total bank failures remained fairly constant over the four quarters of 1929. 
In contrast, the banking crises of late 1930 and early 1933 certainly qualify. 
What rendered the Great Depression so much more long-lived than its predecessors was the series of financial batterings. 

   Policy makers must shoulder a significant share of the blame for the disasters of the 1930s. 
One would think that the newly established Federal Reserve System would have been well situated to cope with the crisis. 
But the way the private sector had dealt with similar problems, in 1895 through the Belmont-Morgan Syndicate and in 1907 through the Clearing House Associations, for example, proved much more effective. 
This is not to argue that the lender-of-last-resort function is best left in private hands, but that lenders of last resort must respond quickly and effectively. 

   History does not repeat itself mechanically, but a historical perspective underscores three important points: 

   First, the events of this year do not qualify as a financial crisis, at least not yet. 
Because destabilizing linkages have not been permitted to form, damage has been limited to asset markets. 
The market's ability to allocate capital may have been disrupted, but it has not been destroyed. 

   Second, the market's resiliency should not surprise us. 
Markets have been resilient in the past in the face of shocks of much greater severity, so long as isolated events have not been allowed to spread and to give rise to a contagion of fear. 

   Third, ensuring that destabilizing linkages do not occur and that panic does not spread is the responsibility of policy makers. 
If we subject our economy to financial crises, it is because regulators and macroeconomic policy makers fail to take the steps required to head them off. 

   ---
   Mr. Eichengreen is professor of economics at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Richard Grossman, a graduate student in economics at Harvard University, assisted in preparing this article. 

   (See related story: "Has Washington Forgotten the '30s?" -- WSJ Nov. 17, 1987) 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
