ID: 261	RANK: 90	SCORE: 6.947924
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861218-0133 </DOCNO>
<HL> America's Labor Federation Turns 100
---
Why Do Canada's Unions Prosper?
---
By Seymour Martin Lipset</HL>
<DD> 12/18/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR CANDA </IN>
<TEXT>
   One hundred years after the founding of the first viable national labor organization, the American Federation of Labor, in December 1886, there is little cause for celebration by the AFL-CIO. 
Union membership has declined steadily during the past 25 years, and is today the lowest proportion in the industrialized world. 

   Why do American unions seem increasingly unable to retain and recruit members and bargain effectively? 

   Some say that the structural transformation of the economy has weakened the bargaining power of unions and their ability to recruit and retain members. 
They cite the decline of smokestack industries, as well as the effects of deregulation and increased international competition. 

   In addition, sociological interpretations point to the effects of changes in the distribution of occupations on class behavior and values. 
Forty years of prosperity and economic growth following World War II and the general rise in education and living standards have produced an increase in white-collar, service and university-trained positions, which are difficult to organize, and a decrease in the proportion of blue-collar workers in the traditionally union-prone environments of factories, mines and the maritime industry. 

   These theories, however, cannot account for the decline when they are tested against the records of labor movements in Canada and other industrialized countries. 
Canada is an ideal subject for comparison because its labor movement, employers and economy resemble, and are closely tied to, those of the U.S. Until recently, the majority of Canadian union members were members of AFL-CIO affiliates; over two-fifths still are. 
But while unions in the U.S. have lost strength in the past 30 years, membership in Canadian unions has grown, reaching 40% of the nonagricultural labor force. 

   This difference suggests that reasons commonly given for the falloff in the strength of American unions are unsatisfactory. 
If changes in the ratio of services to industry play a major role in reducing union density, membership rates should be declining in Canada in even greater fashion, since Canada's service sector is proportionately larger than that of the U.S. and the gap has widened since 1963. 
However, as noted, the reverse is true. 

   One explanation for the decline of unions in the U.S. and their growth in Canada is the difference between the legal environments surrounding union organization in the two countries; Canada's is more friendly to unions. 

   The legal factor is particularly important, for, unlike the European countries that offer no official government sanction for unions, North America prescribes the conditions under which labor organizations gain a government-protected right to represent employees exclusively in collective bargaining. 
And, indeed, there is a difference: In the U.S., representation elections are called after at least 30% of the employees sign a petition; in Canada, unions are certified, in most areas, upon proving they have enrolled 50% to 60% of the employees as dues-paying members. 
Today, U.S. unions lose over 55% of labor-representation elections, compared with less than one-third in the 1950s. 
There is at best only ambiguous evidence that American employers successfully use intimidating tactics to campaign against unions in representation elections. 

   A major reason given for the decline of unions in the U.S. is that Republican-appointed majorities on the National Labor Relations Board, the presidentially appointed commission that verifies certification elections, have administered enforcement of labor law in ways that have made it more difficult for unions to organize than in the past. 
The theory has gained credence with the advent of the Reagan-appointed board, which has been markedly more hostile to union organization than its predecessors. 
The NLRB, however, did not acquire a Reagan-appointed majority until 1983, so that factor cannot be responsible for the steady decline in union strength from 1963 to 1983. 
A study by an AFL-CIO lawyers' committee on the decisions of boards appointed by previous adminstrations shows almost no difference between those appointed by Democrats and those by Republicans. 

   A comparison of the two countries argues strongly against the claims that the decline of American unions is due to changes in economic or legal structures. 
Instead, I suggest another cause for loss of union strength: the revival of traditional national values. 
Support for trade unions has fallen steadily in opinion polls in the U.S. since the mid-1950s, and membership rates have declined almost in tandem. 

   The heyday of American unions occurred during and immediately following the Great Depression. 
During this period, the growth of American unions placed them ahead of the Canadian labor movement in membership density. 
The Depression, an unprecedented event, undermined traditional American beliefs among large sectors of the population, and led to the acceptance by a majority of the need for state action to reduce unemployment, the need to assist those hurt by the economic collapse, and the need to support trade unionism. 
It introduced, in historian Richard Hofstadter's words, "a social democratic tinge" in American political beliefs that had not been there before. 

   This social democratic tinge, including enthusiasm for labor organizations, was weakened by postwar prosperity, which produced higher rates of social mobility and increased standards of living over most of the next 40 years. 
There is substantial evidence from polls that Americans have regained their Depression-weakened faith in the promise of the U.S. as an open, meritocratic society. 

   In contrast, Canada, though similar economically, has been different socially. 
It has a Tory-spawned noblesse-oblige, communitarian and public-enterprise culture. 
Unlike its southern neighbor, therefore, it has no free-enterprise tradition to return to. 
Canadian political parties, including the now-governing Conservatives, remain committed to an activist welfare state. 

   The divergence in union strength across the border reflects the undermining of the social democratic forces unleashed by the Great Depression in the south, and their maintenance in the culturally more hospitable north. 
Robertson Davies, Canada's greatest living novelist, and a Tory, emphasizes that Canadians "are a people firmly set in the socialist pattern." 
The American social structure and values foster the free market and competitive individualism, an orientation that is not congruent with class consciousness, support for socialist or social democratic parties, or a strong trade-union movement. 

   ---
   Mr. Lipset, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University, is editor of "Unions in Transition" (Institute for Contemporary Studies, 1986). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
