ID: 261	RANK: 98	SCORE: 6.793523
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870421-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> Tales From the Dark Side: What
A Market Crash Might Look Like
---
By Cynthia Crossen
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   "My grandfather had an Army-Navy store in 1929, and when the stock market crashed, his comment was, 'It serves those rich bastards right,'" says Frederic S. Mishkin, a professor at Columbia University's graduate school of business. 
"Six months later he lost the store." 

   Many of today's store owners, engineers and middle managers share that image of the stock market as a playground for the rich and reckless. 
But another crash would once again affect people who have never owned a single share of stock. 

   Most economists believe that a crash as stupendous as the one that began in 1929 is unlikely to recur because of the many regulations, like the ones restricting short selling and margin debt, that have been adopted since then. 
They also cite protections designed to prevent an economic crisis from becoming a depression. 

   "We've enacted methods of maintaining income that we didn't have then -- Social Security, unemployment insurance, bank-deposit insurance," says Geoffrey H. Moore, director of the Center for International Business Cycle Research at Columbia University. 
"Those are the things that prevent recessions from becoming severe." 

   But a small group of analysts say that today's volatile stock market is a house of cards -- and that a crash, in which the market loses perhaps half of its value, is inevitable. 
Furthermore, they predict, as the ripple effects of a crash move through the economy, the government will have neither the ability nor the courage to prevent the country from slipping into a period of depression or unprecedented inflation. 

   "People say, 'The government won't let the market get away from us,'" says James Grant, editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer, a financial newsletter. 
"Well, the (Federal Reserve System) has a $250 billion balance sheet, and Citibank has a $200 billion balance sheet. 
The market's much bigger than the government." 

   What might provoke a crash now is unknown even to the doomsayers. 
"The proximate cause of any cataclysm is never seen in advance," says Mr. Grant. 
"It's like the Archduke Ferdinand getting himself shot. 
It could be something as obscure or insignificant as that." 

   Jim Rogers, a professor of finance at Columbia University's graduate school of business, agrees. 
"Whatever it is that causes the collapse will be something you and I haven't thought of," he says. 
"It'll be something like Australia or Norway defaulting because everyone thinks it'll be Mexico or Bolivia." 

   Even so, both Mr. Rogers and Mr. Grant share a suspicion that the Japanese stock market, which is thought to be almost comically overvalued now, may be the culprit. 
"My pet hypothesis for a blowout is that it will come from Japan," says Mr. Grant. 
"It's the most extreme, the ripest speculative excess in the world." 
Because much of the recent surge in the American market has been attributed to buying by foreign, especially Japanese, investors, heavy selling by these same investors would presumably send the market into reverse. 

   Contrary to popular belief, a market crash today would affect many more individuals directly than the one in 1929 did. 
As of 1985, the last year for which figures are available, 47 million Americans owned stock directly or through mutual funds. 
That compares to 1.5 million in 1929. 
And many more people own stock indirectly -- through pension plans, for example. 

   Few direct owners of stock have invested everything they own in the market. 
According to Richard B. Ross, executive director of the Center for the Study of Investor Behavior in Chicago, households with any investment in the stock market have about 25% to 30% of their assets there. 
And because of federal regulations, even fewer have financed their holdings with large amounts of debt. 
So a market crash would hurt, but it's unlikely to bring financial ruin to the typical stockholder. 

   Still, the small investor may be more vulnerable to a falling market than big institutions with their full-time, professional money managers. 
"The little guy in the market is going to get his clock cleaned," says Susan Berge Kent, a market strategist at Tucker, Anthony &amp; R.L. Day Inc. in Rhode Island. 
"If he's not an investor, the best he'll get out of it is he'll lose his job." 

   Furthermore, a falling market would hit mutual funds harder than other institutional investors. 
If mutual-fund shareholders decide to cash in their shares quickly, fund managers would have to sell at any price to raise cash for redemptions. 
Adds Howard Ruff, editor and publisher of Ruff Times, a financial newsletter, "Mutual funds aren't set up to go short to take advantage of a falling market. 
The mutual fund investor will be a big loser in a bear market." 

   Some retired people would also feel the pinch. 
Federal law requires companies with "defined-benefit" plans to back up a pension plan's liabilities with their assets; retirees covered by those plans would get all of their pension payments unless their employer went bankrupt. 
But those covered by defined-compensation plans, where employees choose how to invest contributions made by the company, could be wiped out if their pension funds were invested in the stock market. 

   But the effects of a stock-market crash wouldn't be confined just to those with market investments. 
While a crash itself wouldn't cause a general economic depression, it would lengthen and intensify what followed. 

   And so, for instance, massive layoffs would instantly hit some industries, like financial services, after a market crash. 
Industries catering to the affluent, who have been spending market profits on expensive vacations, cars and restaurants, would also quickly feel the effects. 
Meanwhile, many other people would start getting scared. 
At a time when consumer debt is high, and savings are low, a regular income is all that stands between many people and default. 
Those people would conserve their cash. 

   "Autos, videocassette recorders, washing machines, even some housing, can't be turned into cash without taking a big loss," says Mr. Mishkin of Columbia University. 
"So before you buy one, you think, 'What's the probability I'm going to need cash in the future?' 
If you have a lot of debt, you're not going to want to buy goods like that." 
Amid lower demand for their products, many other industries would begin to lay off workers. 

   Many banks failed after the 1929 crash, leaving even some of those who had savings destitute. 
But David A. Wyss, chief financial economist at Data Resources Inc., an economic consulting company in Lexington, Mass., says the banking system today is much different -- and better protected. 
"Back then, high margin accounts were financed by banks," Mr. Wyss says. 
"When the market dropped, they had all these loan losses" related to stock buying. 
"They have loan losses now," he says, "but they're not stock-market losses, and they wouldn't snowball like they did back then." 
Furthermore, most bank deposits today are federally guaranteed. 

   But whether an already deficit-ridden government could make good on all its insurance programs without sending prices soaring by printing money is another question. 
And some analysts say government insurance might prolong the crisis. 
"In the 1930s, there were no stabilizers, so economic inefficiencies were flushed out quickly," says Mr. Ross of the Center for the Study of Investor Behavior. 
"Now we could put a Band-Aid on the wound, but the wound would last a lot longer." 

   Mr. Rogers of Columbia believes that the government's initial efforts to solve deflation will result in long-term inflation. 
"I suspect the politicians are going to see the unemployment rolls mounting and say, 'OK, let's print money,'" Mr. Rogers says. 
"So at first we might print ourselves into some kind of temporary recovery, but it won't last long." 

   Even temporarily, printing money won't necessarily help, says Mr. Grant. 
"You don't just print money anymore, you create credit," he says. 
"And that requires consenting adults to lend and borrow, which presupposes confidence on the part of both. 
There have been times in financial history when, thank you, everyone passed on those activities." 

   Though economists agree that a crash these days would differ from the one 60 years earlier, they also agree that in economic matters, unpredictability reigns. 
"The best reason for expecting the depression not to recur is that it has already occurred, and we learned some lessons," says Mr. Wyss. 
"On the other hand, one shouldn't ever underestimate the ability of the human race to repeat its past errors." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
