ID: 200	RANK: 20	SCORE: 10.493763
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870827-0099 </DOCNO>
<HL> TRACKING TRAVEL:
No Room Left
For the Fine Print
---
By Jonathan Dahl</HL>
<DD> 08/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)
AIRLINES (AIR) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Some travel companies don't bury restrictions in their ads. 
They just don't disclose them at all. 

   Even though they may be violating a federal regulation, some companies are running ads for low international air fares without mentioning key restrictions. 
In some cases, for example, the companies charge extra for using credit cards. 
One offers a car-rental special that's valid only if two people travel. 
And many of the fares are non-refundable and apply only for a few weeks. 

   The companies are known as ticket consolidators, because they typically buy blocks of tickets wholesale from airlines. 
They insist they disclose restrictions when customers call, and thus don't need to outline them in print. 

   "Most people know to look for these things," says Fred Kunzmann, owner of KTS Services of New York, which didn't mention in a recent ad that it charges a $100 cancellation fee on some discounted fares. 
Another consolidator, Airborne Vacations, says its one-inch ads are too small to list restrictions. 

   But since the ads don't mention limitations, they "attract people who assume there aren't any," says Barbara Opotowsky, president of the New York Better Business Bureau. 
It recently investigated 24 local ticket consolidators, and convinced some of them to describe some restrictions. 

   Most ticket consolidators, though, don't. 
At the Department of Transportation, officials say they were unaware of the practice, but that consolidators could be violating unfair and deceptive trade-practice regulations. 
"They can't just advertise as if there are no restrictions," says Sam Podberesky, an assistant general counsel for the agency. 

   Co-Pilot for a Day
   Ben Smith has flown a dozen times in the co-pilot seat for Provincetown-Boston Airlines. 
And he doesn't know the first thing about flying. 

   PBA is one of a few commuter carriers that still operate some planes with one pilot and put passengers in empty co-pilot seats. 
The Federal Aviation Adminstration allows this on planes with fewer than nine seats; it says such planes require only one pilot because they're easier to operate. 

   "If the other seat is empty, why not use it?" asks an FAA spokesman. 

   But some safety experts say chatty passengers can distract the pilot; clumsy and overanxious "co-pilots" could too. 
"Some yahoo could grab the throttle," says John Galipault, president of the Aviation Safety Institute in Worthington, Ohio. 
PBA calls that highly unlikely, and says the practice hasn't caused any mishaps. 

   "Most people want to sit up front" to watch the pilot, says a PBA spokesman. 
In fact, Mr. Smith, owner of the Point Way Inn in Edgartown, Mass., says he often volunteers to sit in the co-pilot seat to get a unique perspective on takeoffs and landings. 

   "The only thing I wonder about is, if this guys gets a heart attack, will I have to fly the plane?" 
Mr. Smith says. 

   All Lots Full
   There's a new hassle to flying. 
It's called parking. 

   Once a problem only on holidays, airport parking is now a daily struggle in many cities. 
Pick any Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and the main lots at Chicago's O'Hare and New Jersey's Newark airports will probably be packed. 
At Atlanta's Hartsfield Airport, parking volume is up 23% from a year ago; the airport now has to turn away drivers from some long-term lots two or three times a week. 

   And even with 24,200 spaces -- the most for any U.S. airport -- Los Angeles International Airport is "approaching a pretty tight crunch," says parking manager Roy Yoneda. 

   The problem isn't confined to just the large airports; parking volume is up 40% at both Chicago's Midway and Las Vegas' McCarran airports this year. 
To cope, Midway added a new lot last spring, and McCarran began using employee-parking spaces. 

   Obviously, the rise in air travel in recent years is largely to blame. 
"Most airports didn't plan for this," says Marie Witmer, director of technical services for the Institutional and Municipal Parking Congress, a trade group. 
"Parking never gets top billing, until it's a problem." 

   Some airports have started to build new lots. 
But most major expansion efforts won't be completed for at least another year. 
In the meantime, travelers must risk missing flights because they can't find spaces, or must wait in long lines to get through exit toll booths. 

   At Newark, though, long lines can pay off; drivers are occasionally let through the booths without paying. 
Says Vincent Bonaventura, Newark airport's general manager: "We lose revenue, but it clears up the line." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
