ID: 200	RANK: 49	SCORE: 8.824119
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870421-0057 </DOCNO>
<HL> Ceilings on Phone-Company Earnings
Are Being Chipped Away by Regulators
---
By Johnnie L. Roberts
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   State utility regulators are chipping away at the ceilings that historically have been placed on phone-company earnings. 

   Recently, a few states have approved cuts in the price of phone service that will let companies earn more than their allowed rate of return. 
As a result, phone-company shareholders could be in for larger rewards than in the past. 
At the same time, customers are getting big reductions in their phone bills, and there is the promise of stabilized prices for basic phone service for at least the rest of the decade. 

   In New York earlier this month, utility regulators, politicians, consumer groups and Nynex Corp.'s New York Telephone Co. unit were the first to reach such a milestone agreement. 
Wisconsin, where an Ameritech unit operates, proposed a similar plan last week. 
Another proposal is working its way through the Vermont state legislature. 

   The move to this type of agreement began last year in California, when Pacific Telesis Group proposed a plan that would let it earn above its allowed rate and retain some of the excess. 
For several reasons, the Pacific Telesis plan was withdrawn, but it could be resubmitted this year. 

   Like many other changes in the telephone industry, the new rate plans are partly the result of the rapid evolution of technology and deregulation. 
"Most state regulators realize that traditional regulation doesn't work well in the phone industry anymore," says Louise McCarren, chairman of the Vermont Public Service Board. 

   The new rate plans are emerging from regulatory reviews of phone-company earnings levels following the adoption of the nation's new tax structure. 
The regional Bells are paying a lower tax rate than previously, which is producing an earnings windfall. 

   For half a century or longer, regulators have pursued "rate-based" regulation. 
Under that approach, they decided what the return on equity should be for the phone companies, and expenses were then estimated. 
Regulators then could determine the revenue the phone company needed to collect to earn its allowed rate of return. 

   Regulators and academicians "have been talking about alternatives to rate-base regulation for 100 years," says John Bain, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. 
"The existing process is costly, time consuming and probably not accurate." 

   Under the New York plan, phone bills for customers of New York Telephone will fall as much as a total of $700 million for the years through 1990. 
The phone company's rate of return remains at 14%. 
But it may keep half of any profit that exceeds that level while sharing the other half with customers. 
Heretofore, the company might have been ordered to return the full amount to customers. 

   After reading of the New York plan, the chairman of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission proposed a similar plan for Wisconsin Bell, an Ameritech unit. 
The regulators reduced the allowed rate of return to 13.5% from 14%. 
However, the plan allows the phone company to retain all profit it earns up to 13.75%. 
It must share 50-50 any profit from 13.75% to 14.5%. 
The plan represents "a loosening of some of the strict constraints of rate-base regulation," says Richard Witte, Wisconsin's division staff manager for regulatory affairs. 

   Because some phone companies are already earning their allowed rate of return, profit growth has slowed. 
So, any opportunity for the companies to exceed the allowed rate could be a boon for shareholders. 

   Vermont dubs its alternative the "social contract" approach. 
Under the proposed legislative measure, the price of basic local phone service basically would remain stable for a certain period. 
Prices of all other services would be deregulated. 
The crowning feature is that New England Telephone Co., the Nynex unit that operated in Vermont, won't "have its rate of return constrained at all," says Ms. McCarren of Vermont Public Service. 

   She says the approach places the maximum amount of competitive tension on the phone company. 
Because there is no regulated ceiling on profit, the company has the incentive to provide new services and products and to operate efficiently. 
At the same time, Ms. McCarren adds, the company can no longer count on regulators to rescue it through price increases on basic phone service if its competitive ventures don't pay off. 

   Many industry analysts concur that such plans provide an incentive for the phone companies to become more efficient and to offer new products and services. 
But some don't believe all state utility regulators will embrace the trend. 
Robert Morris III, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., contends the proposals will be restricted to the Northeast and Midwest. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
