ID: 200	RANK: 76	SCORE: 7.150648
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870106-0083 </DOCNO>
<HL> Phone Companies Draw Fire by Seeking
To Base Local Phone Charges on Usage
---
By Johnnie L. Roberts
Staff Reporter of The wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<DATELINE> A seemingly simple proposal  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    to start charging for local
phone service on a usage basis -- is sparking pitched battles
between some phone companies and their customers.
   At present, more than 80% of phone customers in the U.S. have so-called flat-rate service, which entitles them to unlimited local calling for a set monthly rate. 
Those receiving local measured service, as the proposed alternative is known, also pay a basic rate but incur a fee for local calls. 
Monthly bills reflect such factors as the number, duration, distance and time of day of local calls. 

   Phone companies in Maine, Oklahoma and several other states have recently tried to institute local measured service, arguing -- as have some regulators -- that it is the fairest way to price local calling, especially as rising costs force rate increases. 
Under measured service, the companies say, the majority of customers would have smaller phone bills without changing their calling habits. 

   But many customers, particularly the elderly and small businesses, are vigorously opposed. 
They fear that measured-service pricing would shift the burden in some cases onto users unable to afford it. 
They also feel that measured service is merely a way for the companies to push through rate increases more easily. 

   Local measured service isn't a new idea. 
In 1901, for example, it became the only type of local service available in Manhattan. (Although flat-rate service was later offered, few customers chose it, and so the phone company abolished the option in the 1950s.) 
And a number of companies began offering measured service at least as an option in the 1970s, as local calling areas were expanded in growing suburbs. 

   But more local phone companies have come to see measured service as a way to damp the shock of overall higher rates. 
Since the Bell System's breakup in 1984, there has been a trend toward cost-based pricing, in part because subsidies from long-distance operations have shrunk. 
Prices for local service have risen by as much as 20% on average, says the Consumer Federation of America. 

   The companies say their goal is to establish "intercustomer equity" -- that is, to have customers pay only for the service they use. 
They note, too, that most of the plans are designed to be "revenue neutral," generating no more or less revenue than under flat rate. 
"The majority of the industry feels local measured service is the way to go," says James Mercer, an official of the U.S. Telephone Association, the industry's main trade group. 

   Yet as more phone companies push for local measured service, opposition has grown more intense. 
Many critics -- including such organizations as the Consumer Federation of America, the American Association of Retired Persons and the National Association of Independent Businesses, a small-business interest group -- say that people aren't complaining that light users subsidize heavy users under flat-rate pricing, so why change things? 
Measured service "is no good for ratepayers in general and low-income people in particular," says Roger Colton, a lawyer with the Boston office of National Consumer Law Center Inc. 

   Despite assurances to the contrary from phone companies and regulators, critics also say that local measured service is merely a way to facilitate rate increases. 
For example, a penny rise in rates to 11 cents is equivalent to a $1 increase to $11 in a monthly flat rate, "but it is far less visible," asserts Robert Morris III, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. Consequently, he adds, for regulators "the political heat that a flat-rate increase carries with it is a lot hotter than the political heat from" increasing per-minute rates. (Peter Bradford, president of the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, says he doesn't believe that to be true.) 

   Moreover, critics argue, telephone lines, poles and other equipment for providing service are mostly fixed costs; thus, once such networks exist, making calls over them carries no real additional costs. 
"It's like a revolving door," says Wanda Jo Peltier, a state legislator in Oklahoma who is proposing a three-year ban on measured service there. 
"It doesn't matter if one person or 10 walk through, the door costs the same." 
With a flat rate, she contends, each customer pays an equal share of the network's overall costs. 

   So far, proponents of local measured service are being bruised. 
In Maine, where some 100,000 customers had opted for it, measured service went into effect last February. 
But through petitions, opponents had the issue put before voters in November, who rejected it 58% to 42%; it is no longer available even as an option. 
New England Telephone Co., which first proposed measured service as an option, spent $1.5 million to fight the referendum, arguing that such regulation is the responsibility of regulators and the legislature. 

   In Oklahoma, citizens forced Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. last month to drop its plan, which the company itself admits was a confusing array of pricing packages that included both measured and flat-rate service and a combination of the two. 
At a public meeting in Tulsa, a crowd of about 1,000 gave a hostile reception to Southwestern Bell officials who tried to explain the plan. 
"There was screaming going on, and our representatives couldn't complete a sentence," recalls a phone company spokesman. 
"We definitely got our nose bloodied in Tulsa." 

   In Washington state, a moratorium on mandatory measured service was recently extended for another year. 
In Texas, there are plans to reintroduce a moratorium proposal in the state legislature. 
And a battle is also shaping up in Indiana, where measured-service bans have been proposed to block Indiana Bell Telephone Co.'s plan. 

   Phone companies in some states have had better luck. 
"We've had good customer acceptance" of measured service, says Louise McCarren, chairman of the Vermont Public Service Board. 
If Vermont hadn't instituted local measured service in 1985, Ms. McCarren says, customers would be paying a flat rate of $18.18 monthly, up from $13.70. 
Under measured service, they can now get a phone line for a base fee of $10.93. 
Moreover, a study released last November by the Center for Rural Studies at the University of Vermont found that some 63% of all households pay less under measured service than under flat rates. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
