ID: 200	RANK: 9	SCORE: 12.697377
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880712-0109 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Romance in Old America </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Something strange has been going on in bookstores for a number of years. 
Erle Stanley Gardner could have titled it "The Case of the Missing McCarry." 

   I picked up some fresh evidence the other day at my local shop, no small emporium, where the latest in everything from Ludlum to literary biography can be had for a price. 

   Under the sign "Mystery," multiple copies of 13 John Le Carre novels were stacked in the "L's." 
A little further down the alphabet, there were shelfloads of McBain, MacDonald and MacInnes. 
But not a trace of Charles McCarry. 
His absence stuck out, as Raymond Chandler wrote in a different context, like "a tarantula on a slice of angel food." 

   Mr. McCarry's first five novels are among the best espionage tales of our time. 
Each has been published to glowing reviews, been devoured by enthusiastic fans and then become hard to find. 
Hero Paul Christopher, a Central Intelligence Agency officer, went to Harvard, published some poetry, is handsome, athletic and not uninterested in beautiful women. 
The plots unfold against the landscape of contemporary tragedies -- Vietnam, Berlin, Eastern Europe -- and they have attracted enough readers in England and France to put Mr. McCarry's name on best-seller lists, but there has been no megaseller here. 

   Perhaps in exasperation, Mr. McCarry (once a CIA officer himself), has abandoned contemporary spydom. 
"The Bride of the Wilderness" (New American Library, 438 pages, $18.95) is an old-fashioned historical adventure novel jammed with incident, thronged with characters, packed with carefully researched detail. 
The wildly romantic story, awash in blood and driven by sexual obsession, brings the first Christophers, ancestors of the CIA's Paul Christopher, to the U.S. and settles them in the wilderness at the start of the 18th century. 

   Mr. McCarry writes as well as ever. When Fanny, the beautiful teen-aged heroine, sails into Boston harbor, she hears church bells "very feeble, not like English bells." Then the bells stop:
   "America was as silent as the grave. 
Fanny had never been in such a silent place, and she realized that she was only on the edge of it. 
How far could the bells be heard when they were rung on Sundaya mile, two miles if the wind was right? 
Beyond that point, Fanny thought, it must be just as silent as it had been before the English came. 
We are at the edge of an enormous place, the largest, emptiest place on earth and there is nothing in it but silence. 
It is to the ear what darkness is to the eye." 

   In fitting romantic tradition, America becomes for Fanny an ordeal beyond a lesser woman's endurance, capped by the triumph of passionate love. 
If that sounds corny, it is. 
Mr. McCarry is writing true to the romantic genre he has chosen. 
His story is so fast-paced that, as they say of London weather: If you don't like it, wait a minute. 
It will change. 

   For all the romantic adventure of the novel, Mr. McCarry breaks with one tradition -- he sprinkles no perfume on 1700 life in London or America. 
London streets are deep in mud. 
Disease flourishes. 
Baths are scarce and odors widespread. 

   Mr. McCarry has stored up lore and used it well. 
At a London school a master concentrates his students' minds by making them hop while reciting Latin verse. 
Football games are brutal affairs from which men may return maimed, or, as in the case of Fanny's father, not return at all. 

   Cruelty abounds. 
Blood flows into London's mud, across ship's decks, into New England snows. 
Children often are the victims, their brains bashed out against trees, or their bodies left buried in the snow. 
Mr. McCarry's prose makes the gore bright and the pain real. 
I flinched a few times. 

   Perhaps "The Bride of the Wilderness" will bring Mr. McCarry a wider audience, but I like Mr. McCarry better when he is writing about the adventures, betrayals and follies of our own age. 
Historical romance is a narrow genre: plenty of room for fabulous characters and plot twists, but not much for subtext. 

   What makes Mr. McCarry's earlier books excellent is his clear, cold eye for the ambitions and treacheries of modern governments, not to mention contemporary friends and lovers. 
The secret world of espionage becomes paradigm for the wider life of the world. 
What he writes about our world resonates as a story about life in 1700 cannot no matter how thorough his research. 

   Mr. McCarry, who is an editor at National Geographic in Washington, in recent years had unusual opportunities to study Washington's highest levels. 
He collaborated with former Secretary of State Alexander Haig on his memoir, "Caveat," and with Donald T. Regan, former Treasury secretary and White House chief of staff, on his best-selling "For the Record: From Wall Street to Washington." 

   Once again, Mr. McCarry is missing where he might be expected to be found. 
His name doesn't appear on the cover of either memoir, although he is credited on the acknowledgment pages. 
I hope that some of what ghost-memoirist McCarry learned will inform future McCarry novels. 

   ---
   Mr. Lescaze is the Journal's deputy foreign editor. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
