ID: 99	RANK: 10	SCORE: 9.411095
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861222-0144 </DOCNO>
<HL> If He Existed at All,
Nicholas of Myra
Was the First Santa
---
He Is Also the Patron Saint
Of Thieves and Lawyers;
The St. Nick Symposiums
---
By Philip Revzin
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/22/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> DEMRE, Turkey  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The closest thing there is to a spiritual heir of St. Nicholas has no reindeer, no elves, doesn't live at the North Pole, doesn't climb down chimneys bearing gifts on Christmas Eve and doesn't say ho! ho! ho! 

   "Fine, fine, fine," says His Excellency Chrysostomos, the Metropolitan of the Holy See of Myra, when introduced to visitors outside the Santa Claus Church here. 
The bishop normally lives in Istanbul, which he would rather call Constantinople, where he helps run the Greek Orthodox Church. 
He has Santa's girth, but his red and gold vestment has no fur trim, and he doesn't wear a hat. 
With his neatly trimmed white goatee, he looks more like Col. Sanders than Santa Claus. 

   The bishop sweeps up the steps behind the makeshift altar table to a stone pedestal in the nave of the church, which except for this special occasion is now just a museum. 
A six-member Greek chorus chants. 
With a golden staff in his left hand, he conducts a two-hour liturgical service. 

   "You could say I am the apostolic successor to Nicholas," says the bishop of Myra, as he changes back into his black three-piece suit. 
"All of the Santa Claus stories, well, they all start from here." 

   But for the twists of history, Santa Claus might well speak Turkish, ride a camel, dress for the warm winter sun, bear gifts of oranges and tomatoes, and do his thing on Dec. 5, instead of Christmas Eve. 

   According to the story, Nicholas was a genuine historical figure -- the first bishop of Myra -- born in the now-vanished town of Patara. 
The remains of Myra, a well-preserved amphitheater, are about 60 miles west of Antalya on the Mediterranean coast of Turkey. 
As the story goes, Nicholas was known far and wide for his piety and charity, and because Myra was a thriving port town, he was considered the protector of sailors. 

   Turkish scholars say he was killed around A.D. 245, and after his martyrdom, on Dec. 6, tales of his good deeds lived on. 
Miracles were attributed to his intercession, and he was eventually sainted. 
Greek scholars say that he lived still later; indeed, they say he attended the first Ecumenical Council in 325, where his advice on organizing the church was warmly received. 

   In any event, his fame was so great that when the Italian branch of the Catholic church in the 11th century began a drive to bring the remains of the most famous saints back to Italy, thieves stole most of Nicholas's bones from the church tomb here and took them to Bari, a town on the Adriatic Sea in southern Italy. 
The bones have lain there since 1087. 
From Bari, the cult of the patron saint of sailors spread north to other port towns. 

   When it got far enough north, Nicholas was abbreviated to Claus, and St. Nick became Santa. 
All the stuff about reindeer, elves and the toyshop at the North Pole was embroidered to fit local conditions and the exigencies of commerce. 
Santa Claus also came to be known as Father Christmas and, in Moslem Turkey, Noel Baba. 

   The gift-giving stories are strongest in Protestant countries, where saints aren't venerated. 
In Holland, Santa comes by boat from Spain on Dec. 5, in Germany by sleigh out of the snowy woods on Dec. 24. 
Northern European Catholics began giving gifts on Christmas Day to show thanks to God, church scholars say, but the tradition has been swamped by that of Santa Claus within the past few generations. 
Many Orthodox Greeks still exchange gifts on Jan. 1, the feast day of St. Basil; in Spain, gifts are given on Epiphany, Jan. 6, by the Three Wise Men. 

   The roots of the down-the-chimney story, popular in northern Europe and the U.S., may lie in one of the many tales told of the original St. Nicholas of Myra: 

   One day three maidens of Myra went to the bishop, saying that unless they could find dowries enabling them to marry, they would be sold into prostitution. 
The bishop, who came from a wealthy family, raised the money, and in the middle of the night threw a sack of gold through the open window of each one's house, to be found the next morning, thus saving the girls. 

   (This, incidentally, is said to be why the pawnbroker's symbol is three gold balls. 
St. Nicholas is not just the protector of sailors; he is also the patron of moneylenders, the patron of miners, the erstwhile patron saint of Russia, and the patron of thieves and lawyers.) 

   One thing that is known for sure is that virtually nothing is known for sure about the original Nicholas of Myra. 
There are no documents in which any such bishop is named and no records of the first Ecumenical Council. 
"He may or may not have existed," says Angela C. Hero, a professor of Byzantine history at Queens College in New York. 
Some scholars say that there definitely was a Nicholas who was a bishop of a town (not Myra) in Turkey but that he was never sainted. 

   This dearth of proof has led to any number of religious and historical spats. 
Many have been aired at the annual St. Nicholas Symposiums organized here for the past four years by the Greek Orthodox Church. 
The basic question: Was he or wasn't he? 

   "I'm absolutely certain that there was a bishop of Myra named Nicholas who was renowned for his charity," says Ernst Suttner, a professor of theology at the University of Vienna. 
"I can show you no proof, but for a cult and legend to have gone so deep into the world's consciousness, there must have been something at the start. 
From nothing, you get nothing." 

   Turkish scholars say that there was something here even before Nicholas. 
Enis Erdem Ece of Akdeniz University says the Nicholas legends grew from the myth of Apollo, who was also said to have been born in Patara and who was the protector of youth. 
Others say Nicholas was the Christian successor to Poseidon, god of the sea. 

   This is not pleasing to the Christians. 
"Nonsense," Prof. Suttner calls it. 
"You don't need old gods to explain Nicholas. 
Myra is on the sea, so he became associated with the sea." 

   Fahri Isik, a professor of archaeology at Erzurum Ataturk University, offers different proof. 
He says there had to have been a famous personality named Nicholas before the fifth century "because, all of a sudden, people started naming their children Nicholas." 
The Western names Nichols, Nicholson, Colson and Collins all derive from Nicholas of Myra, the professor adds. 

   Whatever the truth, today's tourist-conscious Turks have carefully preserved the Santa Claus Church here, and recently they erected in the gardens a statue of a hirsute, Western-style Santa (with a fur-trimmed suit and a sack over his shoulder) surrounded by children. 
The Noel Baba tea garden across the street caters to tourists all year long. 
The annual symposium this year attracted more than 200 people. 

   This year the Turks even granted the Greeks a major concession by allowing the religious Mass in the museum, the first time a Greek Orthodox Mass has been celebrated here since the 1922 "exchange of populations" between Greece and Turkey. 

   To the townspeople of nearby Demre, most of whom grow oranges, lemons or tomatoes, the veneration shown by these pilgrims is inexplicable. 
Only a few locals stare at the bearded clergymen and the busloads of tourists. 
Rifle-toting soldiers stand in the surrounding orange groves, protecting the visitors. 
In the middle of the service, the call to prayer from the mosque next door threatens to drown out the Greek chants. 

   To Bishop Chrysostomos, the heir of Nicholas, the melange of cultures and commerce is all to the good. 
"The message of Nicholas -- charity and love -- is universal," he tells the congregation. 
"Nicholas now belongs to the world." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
