ID: 99	RANK: 25	SCORE: 6.997124
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870331-0013 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
Befogged Over the Aegean</HL>
<DD> 03/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP </IN>
<TEXT>
   Greece and Turkey have cooled their latest crisis over the Aegean Sea, but it's important to understand what transpired. 
Greek Premier Andreas Papandreou threatened to close NATO military bases in Greece to score a few points in an ancient feud and distract his fellow Greeks from his own economic and political mismanagement. 

   The Aegean is a permanent crisis rooted in history. 
After the Ottoman Empire collapsed after World War I, Kemal Ataturk founded Turkey as a modern secular state, along the way defeating Greek armies that had invaded to take some revenge for 400 years of Turkish rule. 
Ataturk helped forge a Solomonic settlement: The mainland will be Turkish, the islands will be Greek. 
After 1923, some 1.5 million Christians left Turkey for Greece and its islands, and some 800,000 Moslems left the islands for Turkey. 
This dramatic exchange of populations helped prevent the kind of tensions that remain in Cyprus, which was exempt from the 1923 settlement because of British rule. 

   The solution, though, leaves a geographical legacy: Some of the Greek islands are in sight of the Turkish coast. 
If each of the islands is granted a 12-mile territorial limit, the Aegean could be closed to Turkish shipping. 
Istanbul and the Bosporus would be landlocked. 
Naturally, Turkey considers the Aegean a vital interest. 
It refused, for example, to sign the Law of the Sea Treaty, which includes a loony continental-shelf theory that would give 97.5% of the shelf to Greece. 

   We somehow doubt that it was pure chance that this feud heated up just now. 
Mr. Papandreou kicked matters off by proposing to buy out a Canadian-led consortium that's been pumping oil off the Greek island of Thassos. 
In the process, it developed that the consortium planned to drill outside the six-mile limit, and Athens made loud noises about kicking over a 10-year-old understanding to preserve the status quo on developing the Aegean sea bed pending a demarcation agreement. 
Surely the prime minister understood that Turkey could not ignore this. 

   When the Turks reacted by cranking up the same old unarmed Sismik 1 exploration vessel that was involved in the original dispute in 1974, Mr. Papandreou put the Greek military on full alert, vowing to "teach the Turks a very hard lesson if they don't back down." 
He not only threatened American bases in Greece, but capped it all by having his foreign minister brief Warsaw Pact, not NATO, ambassadors and fly to Sofia to inform Bulgaria's Turkophobic president, Todor Zhivkov. 

   The media and politicians took the bait. 
A highly reputable international journal headlined: "Turkey Heats Up Dispute With Greece on Aegean Oil." 
British TV trapped Turkish Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, convalescing from heart surgery, and demanded to know if he was "willing to risk war" just to sail Sismik 1. 
Turkey, with the second-largest armed forces in NATO, has little to fear from much smaller Greece. 
Yet it was Mr. Ozal who defused the situation by offering to keep Sismik 1 in Turkish territorial waters as long as the Greeks refrained from drilling. 
Marking the end of the crisis, Greece's pro-government, pro-Moscow paper Ethnos ran the Orwellian headline: "Turks With Tails Between Legs." 

   So what was Mr. Papandreou up to? 
It's not hard to guess. 
The former Berkeley professor is pumping up anti-Turkish passions in the influential Greek emigrant community and with the left. 
After big losses for his party in municipal elections, he needs a distraction from the run-down Greek economy and his latest outrage, a plan to confiscate $1.2 billion worth of land from the Greek Orthodox Church. 
The "Turkish threat" is also handy just while the U.S. is deliberating the level of security assistance to Turkey and as Turkey is formally beginning its quest for full European Community membership. 

   This comes at a time, too, of increasing American respect for Mr. Ozal's Turkey, a nation he has transformed from a regulated, inward-looking economy into a free-market, free-trade nation, eager to live up to its security commitments. 
Secretary of State George Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger have both been active in pressing the case for more aid to Turkey, which the Pentagon has labeled the "most important" NATO need for improvement. 
Congress, which has earmarked foreign aid for Israel and Egypt, has balked on Turkish aid because of pressure from the Greek lobby. 
It insists on the notorious 7-to-10 ratio, requiring $7 of aid to Greece for every $10 given to Turkey. 

   At some point Western opinion needs to cut through the Aegean fog and recognize that knee-jerk sniping at Turkey undercuts Western interests. 
Even more devoutly to be desired is that at some point the Greek electorate will outgrow these games, and stop letting anti-Turkish and antiU.S. rhetoric be used as an excuse for domestic misgovernment. 
Then perhaps Turks and Greeks can recognize that they share many interests in the Aegean and beyond. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
