ID: 99	RANK: 29	SCORE: 6.941133
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870318-0057 </DOCNO>
<HL> Wall Street and the Age-Old Tragic Flaw
---
By John K. Clemons</HL>
<DD> 03/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Second-guessing Wall Street's insider-trading scandal has become a growth industry. 
Politicians claim the whole thing could have been prevented by tougher regulations. 
Economists blame the system. 
"What do you expect," they ask, "when arbitragers' returns routinely reach 35% to 50%? 
Pussycats?" 

   Psychologists, too, are having a field day. 
They contend that the insatiable thirst for profit, the lavish life styles and the manipulation of the market are all products of (you guessed it) lousy childhoods. 

   Come on. 

   Things are simpler than that. 
It's plain arrogance that has given Wall Street its biggest jolt in decades. 
The symptoms are easy to detect precisely because they are so inherently a part of human nature -- the "we-are-so-powerful-we-can-do-anything" syndrome combined with the naive belief that once on a roll, always on a roll. 
It's an old story. 

   And it was told well by Sophocles, the fifth-century B.C. Greek playwright whose tragic characters illustrate the damage done by usurping authority, abusing power and lacking respect for others. 
Most important, they demonstrate that arrogance is downright bad business. 
Just change the names and places, and today's Levines, Boeskys and Siegels become the tragic protagonists in his stories. 

   Ajax, for example, is "top gun" among the Greeks in the Trojan War. 
In battle, he is likened to a lion, and enemy soldiers are understandably awed. 
Sophocles revealed Ajax's tragic flaw when Ajax is denied a promotion. 
The affront so rankles him that he seeks revenge by murdering the Greek leaders. 
But the gods intervene and turn him on the Greeks' livestock. 
After coming to his senses the next day, he is so overcome with shame that he kills himself. 

   Ajax's crime is not that he slaughtered a few goats and sheep or attempted revenge on his unappreciative bosses. 
His real offense is arrogance. 
Early in the play the youthful Ajax, leaving home to join the Greek army, is offered some parting advice by his father: "My son, seek victory in arms, but seek it always with the help of heaven." 
Ajax blusters, "Father, with the help of gods even a weak man might win, but I, even without their aid, trust to bring glory within my grasp." 
Youthful boasting? 
Perhaps. 
But when, as an adult, Ajax brags even to the gods that he is omnipotent, it is unpardonable. 

   To the ancient Greeks, there was nothing unusual about this. 
The idea that the gods would slap down any mortal who became too powerful, rich or ambitious was part of their culture. 
"The gods are accustomed to throw down whatever rises too high," said the Greek historian Herodotus. 
Words to Wall Street's wise. 

   Shakespeare's "Macbeth" is another story of arrogance, ambition and evil. 
As Thane of Glamis, Macbeth is the model young nobleman: brave and courageous, his king's most glorious general. 
But arrogance is to get the better of him: 

   I have no spur
   To prick the sides of my intent, but only 

   Vaulting ambition, which o'er leaps itself
   And falls on th' other -- . 

   When the king visits Macbeth's castle, Macbeth sneaks into his bedchamber and stabs him. 
Macbeth is crowned king, but he is consumed by guilt. 
Experiencing gradual disintegration, he utters the lines that signal the futility of his existence: 

   Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player, 

   That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
   And then is heard no more. 
It is a tale 

   Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury
   Signifying nothing. 

   Macbeth is finally beheaded by an avenging general. 

   Ajax and Macbeth dramatize clearly what's happening on Wall Street: unbridled arrogance and ambition leading to inevitable falls. 
Like Ivan Boesky's. 
His career began to self-destruct not when the Securities and Exchange Commission accused him of insider trading, but when, in 1985, he arrogantly told a crowd of adoring business students: "Greed is all right, by the way. 
I want you to know that. 
I think greed is healthy. 
You can be greedy and still feel good about yourself." 
His is the all-too-common tale of a supersuccessful individual so contemptuous of others that he loses all sense of propriety. 
By the time he notices, it is too late. 

   Mr. Boesky -- whose prep-school education presumably included an introduction to Greek and Shakespearean tragedies -- may have been less surprised than others by his own downfall. 
Perhaps he remembered the line from Shakespeare's "Henry VIII": "Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition, by that sin fell the angels." 
And he knew that arrogance had infected him. 
Asked about his obsessive money making, he once said: "It's a sickness I have, in the face of which I am helpless." 
He had a premonition of the end. 
"I can't predict my demise," he told an interviewer, "but I suspect it will occur abruptly." 

   That's a tragic story. 
But the oldest in the world. 

   ---
   Mr. Clemons teaches management at Hartwick College and is co-author of "The Classic Touch: Lessons in Leadership from Homer to Hemingway," to be published by Dow Jones-Irwin next month. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
