ID: 99	RANK: 31	SCORE: 6.937102
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881117-0109 </DOCNO>
<HL> Does 'Iliad' Lose A Little in Recital By an Accountant? --- Mr. Powelson Can Reel It Off In Greek, From Memory, But His Audiences Yawn </HL>
<AUTHOR> Lee Berton (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
      The wrath do thou sing, O goddess, of
   Peleus' son, Achilles . . . 

   So begins Homer's 15,693-line "Iliad." 
It would take all day, from rosy-fingered dawn to dark-browed night, to recite the entire epic of the siege of Troy -- just the thing, perhaps, to stave off boredom on a New York-Beijing flight or a Saturday night in the drunk tank. 

   If your muse isn't up to it, no matter. 
The bard of Les-Loges-en-Josas, France, Stephen Powelson, stands ready, able and more than merely willing to pour the first 14,300 lines into your ear, from memory -- and in classical Greek. 
Soon, he hopes, he will have committed the final 1,393 lines to memory. 

   Mr. Powelson, a 70-year-old accountant, lives in the Paris suburb of Les-Loges-en-Josas, near Versailles. 
He has returned to the U.S. at least 40 times in the past 10 years to do the "Iliad" thing, usually for not more than an hour or two, at schools and colleges. 
At these exhibitions of mnemonic prowess, a resident classicist randomly picks a line from the epic, and Mr. Powelson takes it from there. 

   Awesome. 
Says Mr. Powelson: "Everyone I meet can hardly wait to see if I can meet all these challenges." 

   But don't roll over, Homer, not just yet. 
As you might have put it, not all men reckon as sweeter than honey the words that escape the barrier of the many-languaged Mr. Powelson's teeth. 
To put it more bluntly, some people, including several classicists, say Mr. Powelson comes off as a crashing bore, ruining the poetry of the "Iliad" by reciting it in a relentless, mind-numbing, mile-a-minute monotone. 

   Gordon Kirkwood, a retired classics professor at Cornell University, describes a Powelson performance as "an amazing tour de force." 
But, he says, "It's something to admire from a distance rather than hear." 
Mr. Kirkwood, an authority on Greek life some 3,000 years ago, says that "the original rhapsodists who recited the 'Iliad' did it with a lot of emotion. 
Some might even weep or cry, and it was a very lively experience as contrasted with what Mr. Powelson does." 

   Alice Bennink, whose husband was a 1938 classmate of Mr. Powelson's at Harvard College, heard Mr. Powelson's recitation at a class reunion last June. 
"He's learned it by rote, so he rattles on very quickly and almost without any verbal or facial expression," Mrs. Bennink says. 
"I can't believe that the original bards of Greece narrated it like that." 

   Yet Mr. Powelson manages to keep the invitations coming. 
Z. Philip Ambrose, chairman of the classics department at the University of Vermont, says that "Steve Powelson is very singleminded, and he's a great promoter of himself." 
Mr. Powelson recited about an hour's worth of the "Iliad" from memory at the university in early 1987 before an audience of about 100. 

   "I'd heard about Powelson from another classicist at the University of Maryland, and then Powelson began to besiege me with letters asking for an invitation," Mr. Ambrose says. 
"Before he did the recitation, I thought I was going to be knocked out. 
But frankly, I found myself nodding at one of the greatest works of literature." 

   At dinner, Mr. Ambrose says, Mr. Powelson couldn't stop reciting the "Iliad." 
"It's an obsession with him," he says. 
"No matter what topic we brought up -- when I told him someone I know had broken a leg -- he would somehow relate it to the 'Iliad' and then begin his recitation all over again. 
I could hardly wait to get away." 

   Mr. Powelson says he isn't an "Iliad"-obsessed bore. 
"I participate in chess tournaments, play tennis and squash, and my favorite sport is water skiing," he says. 
"Why, I can even ski on one foot backwards." 
He does admit to running through the tale of the siege of Troy in fast-forward mode, "because that's the way I have to learn it. 
It's so long and filled with almost unending lists of proper names in some sections." 

   The "Iliad" has 24 books, totaling 600 pages. 
One section in Book II lists the names of 498 Greek ships and warriors in close order. 
Book XVIII contains 33 complex names of sea nymphs. 
When Mr. Powelson recites these names rapid-fire, he sounds like the late Danny Kaye reeling off the tongue-twisting names of 49 Russian composers in only 39 seconds in his novelty song "Tchaikovsky" in the 1941 Weill-Gershwin musical, "Lady in the Dark." 

   Various devices help Mr. Powelson retrieve long strings of names from his memory. 
"Three of the sea nymphs, for example, each has a name that involves water," he says. 
The syllable "cym" in Cymothoe means wave in classical Greek. 
"Actae" in Actaea means beach, and "limne" in Limnoreia means lake. 
Thinking of "a man with a fork of chrome who's an enemy" cues his recall of other names, Phorcys, Chromius and Enmemus. 

   Mr. Powelson began his bardship in 1977, when he was 60. 
Unemployed, with no job in sight, he decided to renew his interest in the classics and memorize the "Iliad" "as a mind exercise to keep me busy and from worrying about getting a job. 
For that sort of thing, my memory is good," he says. 

   At the age of 10, he says, he memorized in one week an entire year's homework in Sunday-school Bible studies. 
In prep school, he memorized the first 100 lines of the "Iliad," took three Greek courses in his senior year and won a national prize for his Greek. 
At Harvard, he studied Greek drama for only one semester and then had "nothing to do with Greek," he says, for 39 years. 

   Mr. Powelson eventually got the job he still holds, managing an office for an Arab businessman in Paris. 
Not long after, friends suggested that he go public with his feat of memory. 
"It sounded like a good idea," Mr. Powelson recalls. 
So he began soliciting appearances at colleges, prep schools and literary clubs in the U.S. and Europe. 
He has performed at the Universities of Arkansas, Colorado and Massachusetts and at Tulane University, among other places. 

   His wife of 47 years, Esther, says that Mr. Powelson is constantly mastering new lines. 
"When we go to lunch and we're waiting for the check or on a station platform waiting for a train, he pulls out his copy of the 'Iliad,'" she says. 
"Sometimes he wakes up in the middle of the night and leaves the bedroom to look up a word in classical Greek." 

   But, she says, "while my husband's memory is phenomenal, it is very selective. 
I still have to find his glasses and keys for him. 
He just doesn't remember where he puts them." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
