ID: 99	RANK: 51	SCORE: 6.449016
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870330-0107 </DOCNO>
<HL> Greece, Turkey Defuse Aegean Face-Off,
But Fight Over Territorial Limits Persists
---
By John Carr and Metin Demirsar
Special to The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP
PETROLEUM (PET) </IN>
<DATELINE> ATHENS, Greece  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Even though Greece and Turkey's showdown over oil-drilling rights in the Aegean Sea was defused quickly, the dispute over the extent of each country's territorial waters is far from settled and could erupt again. 

   "The ground rules for such confrontations have been around for a long time," said a Western diplomat, citing a similar standoff in 1976. 
"It's like a game of chicken -- the two sides come to the brink to test each other's resolve." 

   Greece and Turkey have rival claims on the Aegean seabed and its sizable reserves of commercially exploitable oil. 
Over the weekend, the two North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies neared an armed clash when a Turkish oil-prospecting ship, the Sismik 1, escorted by warships and jet fighters, sailed toward the disputed waters. 

   Greece went on full military alert, and diplomats and other observers said that only a last-minute mutual withdrawal Saturday averted a confrontation in the Aegean. 
Greece gave Turkey reassurances that it wouldn't start drilling in disputed waters around the Aegean island of Thassos. 
And Sismik 1 stayed in Turkish waters, avoiding the disputed waters around the Greek islands of Lemnos, Lesbos and Samothrace. 

   But the central conflict -- who is entitled to search where for oil -- is unresolved. 
And the Greek government, which set off the feud last month by announcing plans to nationalize a foreign oil consortium, continues to insist that it will determine its own drilling agenda. 

   In addition, the dispute is likely to have set back Turkey's plans to seek membership in the Common Market. 
Ali Bozer, Turkey's minister for European affairs, formally announced in Brussels, Belgium, Saturday that Turkey would make an application, expected by diplomats in a few weeks. 

   Greece was already strongly opposed to Turkish membership, but Ankara had hoped that Athens wouldn't try to block the bid at an early stage for fear of standing alone among the 12 member states, diplomats said. 
During the crisis, however, the Greek government canceled a visit to Athens by Mr. Bozer to discuss the application. 

   Turkish officials said that as long as Greece continues to claim so much of the Aegean seabed, friction between the two nations will increase and endanger NATO's vulnerable southeastern flank. 

   Greece claims a continental shelf and territorial waters 12 miles from shore for each of its 2,000 islands, many of which are near the Turkish mainland. 
Under the 1958 Geneva Convention and the Law of the Sea, islands of one nation can have their own continental shelves on the larger shelf of another nation. 

   But Turkey isn't a signatory to the convention or the Law of the Sea, and counters that the Aegean is a "natural extension" of the Turkish mainland. 
Extension of Greek territorial waters from the current six miles virtually would close the Aegean to Turkey and be cause for war, Turkey contends. 

   "The latest Greek move was an effort to turn the Aegean into a Greek lake," a Turkish Foreign Ministry official said. 

   The Greeks conceded a willingness to talk with Turkey on "preliminary proceedings" for taking the Aegean continental shelf dispute to the International Court of Justice at The Hague, the Netherlands. 
But Turkey so far has rejected adjudication. 

   Under the so-called Bern Agreement of 1976, Greece and Turkey agreed on a drilling moratorium in the disputed areas. 
Last month Greece's prime minister, Andreas Papandreou, declared the agreement void, to justify the takeover of Canadian-led North Aegean Petroleum Co. 
The consortium was scheduled to start exploring in disputed waters east of Greece's Thassos island, but has postponed the plans. 

   "This could force Mr. Papandreou to change his tactics," another diplomat said. 
"Constant confrontation helps nobody." 

   Still, Mr. Papandreou appeared to have benefited politically from the crisis, as Greeks overlooked dissatisfaction with the government's economic austerity measures and plans to expropriate church lands in uniting against a perceived foe. 

   Mr. Papandreou is also expected to step up his anti-U.S. rhetoric in the wake of what he said was official U.S. encouragement of Turkey's Aegean oil research plans. 
"If the aim of either NATO or the U.S. is to compel us to go to the negotiating table with Turkey, then this government will not accept it," he said. 

   During the weekend crisis, Mr. Papandreou reiterated threats to close U.S. military bases in Greece. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
