ID: 99	RANK: 61	SCORE: 6.296976
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870415-0091 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor:
Troubled Waters</HL>
<DD> 04/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP </IN>
<TEXT>
   One can agree with your March 31 editorial that, although the recent crisis provoked in the Aegean by Turkey's challenge to Greek sovereign rights has been defused, "it's important to understand what transpired." 
Unfortunately, there is not much else that is accurate or objective in that editorial. 

   So many misstatements and ungrounded interpretations are advanced that it is futile to attempt to address them all. 
A few examples will have to suffice. 
One such is a newfangled "visual doctrine" of territorial sovereignty. 
Having absurdly asserted that the Greek islands of the Aegean are part of Greece as a result somehow of Turkish magnanimity, the editorialist goes on to say that this "solution, though, leaves a geographical legacy: Some of the Greek islands are in sight of the Turkish coast." 
What exactly is the implication of this statement? 
Is their sovereignty being disputed by the editorialist, who proceeds to call the continental-shelf provisions of the Law of the Sea Treaty "loony"? 
But these provisions are based on treaty and customary international law and have been affirmed by the International Court at The Hague in its 1969 decision with reference to the North Sea. 

   The Greek position is straightforward and respectful of the rule of law. 
Greece does not infringe upon any country's sovereign rights. 
But it cannot accept its own sovereign rights being infringed upon. 
Peace cannot be sustained by submission to threats and provocations. 
This position, in fact, brought about the defusion of the crisis, when Greece's determination was brought to the attention of Turkey, the U.S., NATO and EEC ambassadors and other representatives of the international community. 
Greece has renewed its invitation to Turkey to submit their differences on the continental shelf, a strictly legal issue, to the International Court. 

   The editorialist also wishes to lecture and influence the Greek electorate. 
This appears to be in contradiction to the democratic values that the Greek and American people share and for which they have shed blood, when other countries, including Turkey, conveniently stood aside. 
It is in this spirit of affirmation of the American democratic ideals that democratically minded individuals look upon the elected representatives of the American people in Congress for their contribution to peace in the Eastern Mediterranean. 
The recent crisis has clearly indicated that peace can be sustained by continued congressional support for the 7-to-10 ratio of military assistance to Greece and Turkey. 

   Dimitri Gemelos
   Press Counselor
   Consulate General and
   U.N. Mission of Greece
   New York
   ---
   Your editorial portrays Mr. Papandreou as an opportunistic demagogue. 
You appear to forget that when the 1976 government of Prime Minister Constantine Karamanlis was faced with Turkey's "oil-exploration" moves in the Aegean, the Greek armed forces were put on alert and a confrontation with Turkey was narrowly averted. 
It can hardly be argued, however, that Mr. Karamanlis acted because of "anti-U.S." and "anti-NATO" feelings. 

   If a Soviet flotilla with an oil-exploration vessel and two destroyers, escorted by jet fighters, was ready to "dispute" America's 200-mile zone, would you advise our president to simply issue a "diplomatic protest"? 

   Labros E. Pilalis
   Indianapolis
   ---
   It is simply not true that if Greece extended its territorial waters to 12 miles (now the norm in international law), "the Aegean would be closed to Turkish shipping" and Istanbul "landlocked." 
Turkey would be able to do the same as it has already done in the Black Sea; many corridors would remain open. 
Moreover, the right of passage through territorial waters is beyond dispute. 

   P. John Kozyris
   Professor of International Law 

   Ohio State University
   Columbus, Ohio
   ---
   Your editorial would lead one to suspect that the editorial staff does not read the news articles in The Wall Street Journal. 

   According to a March 30 Journal news story, the "loony continental-shelf theory" described in your editorial is actually an international accord of the 1958 Geneva Convention and the Law of the Sea. 
Moreover, also reported in the news article, the Turks have rejected proposals to take the dispute to The Hague court. 
While your editorial speculates widely as to Greek motives in the dispute, there is no speculation as to the persistent Turkish refusal of impartial adjudication. 

   I recommend The Wall Street Journal to your editorial staff as an excellent source of news on which to base its editorials. 

   Michael N. Nafpliotis
   Marietta, Ga.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
