ID: 99	RANK: 92	SCORE: 5.974206
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880128-0143 </DOCNO>
<HL> Its Petals Pumping, Man-Powered Plane Seeks to Copy Myth --- Daedalus Flight Over Aegean Will Take Stamina, Luck; Avoiding Fate of Icarus </HL>
<AUTHOR> David Stipp (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> AIR </IN>
<DATELINE> EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   This high desert place is aviation's working hall of fame. 
The X-1 first punctured the sound barrier overhead. 
Later the space shuttle came to Earth here. 
Now another flying legend is lifting off, its pilot pedaling hard. 

   It is the inaugural flight of the Daedalus, the world's most advanced human-powered airplane. 
All systems are go as it climbs to a cruising altitude of 15 feet. 
But then a gearbox connecting the pedals to the propeller breaks. 
Seconds later, the plane touches down as its ground crew jumps from a chase truck and jogs beside the aircraft to steady its fragile wings. 

   Despite the problem, the Daedalus is almost ready for its main mission: a recreation this spring of the flight of the mythological Greek inventor Daedalus, who escaped from prison on the island of Crete by making wax-and-feather wings and flying 70 miles to the mainland of Greece. 

   The project sprang from the heads of several young engineers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1985. 
Last year, their prototype aircraft flew 133 minutes here to set a world distance record of 37 miles for human-powered flight. 
Backed by corporate and other sponsors, they now have built an even more exquisitely engineered plane, which has the wingspan of a DC-9 airliner but weighs only 70 pounds. 
Its creators boast that their flying potato chip has "the light stuff." 

   Now the project's focus is perfecting a human engine -- an athlete who can float like a butterfly and pedal like a worker bee. 
The flight from Crete will last four to six hours, depending on winds and other factors. 
That is comparable to running two marathons nonstop. 
Some athletic events are longer, but none are so relentlessly demanding. 
If the modern Daedalus lets up even for a few seconds, he will plunge into the sea. 

   "This will be an unparalleled athletic event," says Ethan Nadel, a Yale University physiologist and adviser to the project. 
Mr. Nadel, who calls himself the project's engine mechanic, spent months testing dozens of athletes for the coveted role of Daedalus II, connecting them to heart and lung monitors and making them each take a hard four-hour ride on a stationary bicycle to test their endurance. 

   Some flunked the test. 
Others were rejected because they seemed too cocky. 
MIT's methodical engineers figured that a macho athlete aiming to make a big splash would probably do just that -- in the Aegean Sea. 
They wanted team players, athletes like Glenn Tremml. 

   He is the project's original Mr. Daedalus, a photogenic, personable development-phase pilot. 
Early last year, he set the world distance record, giving the project much-needed credibility. 
Later he was displaced as the project's main athlete when four more-physically talented bicycle racers were tapped as flight candidates. 
But Mr. Tremml, a University of Connecticut medical student, remains the consummate team player. 
"We were worried," he says, "until we found some athletes who could beat me" at cycling. 

   Only one will pedal into aviation history. 
The team follows a staggered training schedule, and the athlete at his physical peak when good weather conditions occur will make the flight. 
Such conditions may be rare, since the Daedalus can fly only in calm air. 

   Living in an apartment near Edwards, the athletes often rise by 5:30 a.m. to begin exhausting days crammed with flying lessons, meetings and bicycle rides of as long as 100 miles. 
Their diet, prescribed by a nutritionist, is jam-packed with energy food, such as pasta. 
Vigilant against dehydration, they are passionate water drinkers. 
Team member Kanellos Kanellopolus, Greece's top bicyclist, keeps a water bottle next to his bed for nocturnal swigging. 

   Bicycle racers are used to riding at speeds of 25 miles an hour or more -- a pace most people reach only going downhill. 
But heart rate matters more than speed to the Daedalus athletes. 
They wear electronic pulse monitors when they are training and are intimately acquainted with the maximum heart rate they can sustain for hours. 
To pace themselves, they set alarms on the pulse monitors to go off when their hearts beat too fast. 

   That happens regularly, especially when they take training rides together, says Greg Zack, a Daedalus athlete from Lexington, Ky. 
"We're all highly competitive," he says. 
"When we hit a six-mile climb in the mountains, it's guaranteed we'll be racing by the third mile." 
It is friendly competition, he adds, but the athletes have been known to quietly turn off their heart alarms when racing, giving themselves a secret edge. 

   They also are learning to fly gliders and the Daedalus prototype, a heavier, sturdier version of its successor. 
And they spend hours sweating in a computerized flight simulator, a kind of video game with pedals rigged up by the MIT whiz kids. 
"If he can't fly well, even a superjock couldn't make it" on the 70-mile flight, says John Langford, the project's director. 

   The Daedalus cruises at only 15 miles an hour and is controlled by a simple joystick. 
But its huge wingspan and gossamer construction make it tricky to fly, and even a minor crash could wreck it. 
Juan Cruz, who developed the featherweight, carbon-fiber tubes that serve as the Daedalus's bones, describes his nightmare-like vision of a slow-motion crash that snaps those spars like match sticks: "The whole plane folds flat. 
People rush to get the pilot out, yelling, 'Is he all right?' 
And then they kill him." 

   When flying, the athletes are coached via radio by Steven Bussolari, an MIT professor and seasoned pilot, who talks them through each flight from a chase truck. 
In Greece, he will follow in a boat. 
"Thank God Steve is there," says Frank Scioscia, a Daedalus athlete from Scranton, Pa., who worries about damaging the Daedalus planes. 
"Boy, I sure don't want to do anything to hurt these babies." 

   The athletes fret more about hitting the "wall" than the water, though. 
The wall is the point at which the mind says "keep going" and the body replies "no way." 
Mr. Nadel, the Yale physiologist, says top athletes typically hit it after about three hours of hard exercise, when energy reserves are exhausted and blood sugar starts to drop. 
To prevent that from happening on the Daedalus flight, he is developing a drink tailored specifically to the energy and water needs of the pilots. 

   Avoiding the wall isn't all physical. 
Erik Schmidt, a Daedalus athlete from Boulder, Colo., says, "We all have a stable of mental tricks" to keep going. 
They can, however, be summed up simply: Never think of your limits or distant goals; keep telling yourself to go just a little farther. 

   If the Daedalus pilot does run out of steam, though, he can toss a line to a chase boat, which in theory will be able to keep the aircraft aloft by pulling it to shore like a giant kite. 
And even if it goes down in the water, it should float. 

   Having honed their airplanes and human engines to a razor's edge, the project's members are confident they will succeed. 
But mindful of Daedalus's brash son, Icarus, who flew too close to the sun, melted his wings and fell fatally to the sea, they carefully avoid hubris. 
"I think it's going to be close," says Mr. Nadel. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
