ID: 207	RANK: 14	SCORE: 9.564918
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880825-0151 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Valuating a College Degree </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Re your Aug. 17 second-front-page article "Benefit of B.A. 
Is Greater Than Ever": The difference in median incomes between college graduates and high-school graduates is ascribable to several factors in addition to the knowledge obtained in college and the prestige associated with a college degree. 
Foremost among these other factors are 1) the significant difference in average motivational levels between high-school graduates and college graduates and 2) the increased emphasis of college students to make money relative to their high-school graduate counterparts. 

   Thus, even if there were no economic value to a college education and degree, income differentials between the two groups could increase due either to 1) the increased value of motivation in the face of fewer clerical jobs relative to jobs requiring technical skills or 2) college students becoming more money-oriented relative to those who did not choose to attend college. 

   The decision on whether to attend college is not a random process for a teen-ager. 
Rather, it is a function of intellectual, emotional, financial and motivational preparedness. 
To ignore the effects of these factors on future income produces a significant bias on the magnitude and meaning of salary differentials. 

   In addition, since the difference of median income is not entirely attributable to the economic value of an education, the actual economic pay-back period will be considerably longer (compared with the figures indicated in the article) for the average college graduate than if he or she had not attended college. 
The mean or average income differential between college graduates and high-school graduates will be even more striking than the median-income comparisons. 
This large differential in average incomes is due to the overwhelmingly high percentage of college graduates among high-income households. 
Comparing median incomes masks this result by looking at the income of the average college graduate rather than the average income of all college graduates. 

   Attributing the magnitude of tuition increases to the increased economic value of a college degree is a difficult task. 
There does not appear to be any significant absolute demand or supply shock in the market for college educations. 
Further, because demand for education (particularly liberal-arts education) is somewhat inelastic, changes in average tuition will likely have little effect on the aggregate demand for education. 

   Last, the value of a college education is driven, at least partially, due to noneconomic reasons. 
Indeed, a student who chooses to pursue a liberal-arts degree at a private institution rather than a technical degree at a public institution does so in part to trade so-called expected psychic income for expected economic income. 
However, the fact that "more college freshmen than ever say they're there to make money" indicates that fewer students are willing to make this trade-off causing students to pursue more money-oriented degrees. 
Thus, even if there were a rise in economic value for a college education, it would not necessarily follow that education is becoming more highly valued by students or that demand pressure for education has increased and has caused average tuition to rise. 

   Russell Read
   Newark, N.J. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
