ID: 287	RANK: 13	SCORE: 5.417265
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880908-0012 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   MOBS PLUNDERED government offices in Burma's capital of Rangoon. 

   As the State Department said it was devising plans for the evacuation of Americans from the Asian nation, thieves looted government offices and warehouses throughout Rangoon. 
State radio said security forces shot five looters. 
Opposition leaders, meanwhile, called for a nationwide general strike today to protest 26 years of one-party rule. 
Protests have driven two governments from office in less than two months. 

   A Western diplomat said that because the situation in Burma is "sliding toward chaos," dependents of U.S. Embassy employees would go to Bangkok. 

   ---
   THE U.S. EVACUATED the Old Faithful Geyser complex because of fires. 

   Windblown embers from a 165,000-acre forest fire ignited at least four buildings in the hotel and campground complex in Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming after hundreds of tourists and non-essential employees left the area. 
About 1,200 firefighters battled the blaze. 
The evacuation was the first in the 116-year history of the oldest U.S. national park, where about 730,000 acres have burned in wildfires this summer. 

   Fires continued to char thousands of acres in California, Idaho, Utah and Washington state. 
Many of the blazes had been ignited by lightning. 

   ---
   Bush portrayed Democratic presidential candidate Dukakis as opposed to defense, but said he didn't "question his patriotism." 
The GOP candidate, however, caused a stir during a speech at an American Legion convention in Kentucky when he mistakenly referred to the day as the anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. 

   Dukakis proposed a loan program for middle-class college students that would provide federal guarantees. 
During a speech to a college audience in New Jersey, the Democrat said Bush was "right there -- all the time" when the Reagan administration reduced grants and loans for students. 

   ---
   Rep. Patricia Schroeder traveled around Europe this spring by Air Force jet -- at six times the cost of using commercial aircraft -- seeking ways to reduce military spending. 
The Democrat from Colorado was accompanied on the 10-day trip by her husband and two aides. 
She defended the trip. 

   ---
   The U.S. has offered the Philippines $489 million in aid this year in an effort to extend American use of two major military bases for two years, congressional sources said. 
The offer includes doubling the yearly fee for using the bases to $360 million. 
Manila has sought more than $1 billion in aid. 

   ---
   A Soviet flight-control official said errors by the commander of a Soyuz space capsule caused the delay in landing the craft. 
The capsule, carrying two cosmonauts, landed Tuesday in the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan after being stranded for 26 hours in orbit with dwindling air and food supplies. 
It had traveled from the Mir space station. 

   ---
   Solidarity's national spokesman received support from Reagan during a meeting at the White House and urged Polish authorities to honor a pledge to negotiate with the banned trade union. 
A Warsaw official said that talks with Lech Walesa won't begin until later this month, and could be canceled in the event of renewed "political" strikes. 

   ---
   Officials in Bangladesh said that all major rivers remained above flood stage and that as many as one-quarter of the nation's 110 million citizens were homeless. 
At least 416 people have been killed by floods caused by monsoons that began in June. 
Aid donors and international groups said a long-term plan for the region should be developed. 

   ---
   The U.S. public-health system has eroded to a point where Americans are at unnecessary risk, a National Academy of Sciences committee said. 
The medical panel said the system probably is less equipped to cope with health emergencies, such as AIDS, than it was 20 or 30 years ago. 

   ---
   Iran's prime minister withdrew his resignation under orders from Ayatollah Khomeini, Iran's official media reported. 
But Premier Musavi, who said he agreed to retract the resignation in the "interests of the country," cited "difficulties in the decision-making process" of Tehran's government. 

   ---
   Reagan has invited the foreign ministers of Egypt and Israel to meet with him Sept. 26 in New York to discuss Mideast peace efforts, U.S. and diplomatic sources said. 
The president is to travel to the U.N. at the end of the month to address a special session of the General Assembly. 
Initially, Shultz had planned to meet with the officials. 

   ---
   The Soviet government said widespread corruption and influence peddling permeated the law-enforcement apparatus of Uzbekistan, the Central Asian republic that is central to the trial of Brezhnev's son-in-law. 
Nine defendants are charged with cronyism and accepting bribes. 
As the trial ended its third day, they hadn't yet entered pleas. 

   ---
   Israeli authorities are investigating an army general for complicity in a draft-dodging plot, Israel radio reported. 
The activities of two majors also are under scrutiny, and a second doctor was arrested on charges of forging medical reports for conscripts attempting to avoid military service. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
