ID: 287	RANK: 78	SCORE: 4.312274
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881019-0020 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   SOUTH KOREA'S ROH CALLED for a summit with North Korea's president. 

   In the first address by a Korean leader to the U.N. General Assembly since the division of the country in 1948, the president urged a meeting with North Korean leader Kim Il Sung to sign a nonaggression pact. 
Urging "peace and reconciliation on the Korean peninsula," he said Seoul "will never use force first against the North." 
In his speech to the 159-member body, Roh also proposed a peace conference involving the U.S., the Soviet Union, China, Japan and both Koreas. 

   Seoul's efforts to ease tension with Pyongyang could lead to a cut in U.S. forces in Korea, a move U.S. officials believe could cool anti-Americanism. 

   ---
   Dukakis blamed last year's stock market crash on "Republican policies of borrow and spend." 
The Democratic presidential candidate also vowed to end the trade deficit in four years. 
The Bush campaign said that blaming the crash on the GOP is "about as meaningful" as accusing it of causing "yesterday's rain." 

   ---
   Frenchman Maurice Allais was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science for contributions to the theory of markets and efficient use of resources. 
The 77-year-old professor is little-known outside France. 
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences cited his "original and independent" work. 

   Israeli troops killed two Palestinians -- a teen-ager and a five-year-old boy -- and wounded a U.S. photographer during clashes in the occupied West Bank. 
The American was the first foreign journalist shot during the 10-month Arab uprising in the occupied lands. 
The soldiers fired plastic bullets. 

   Israel's Supreme Court barred U.S.-born Rabbi Meir Kahane from running in the country's Nov. 1 elections, calling his anti-Arab Kach movement racist. 
The ruling was expected to benefit Prime Minister Shamir's right-wing Likud bloc in its close race with the left-leaning Labor Party. 

   ---
   Ohio Gov. Celeste demanded that Reagan close a government-owned uranium-processing plant until something is done to stop the radioactive pollution it produces. 
The Energy Department admitted last week that it has been aware since 1951 of dangerous environmental problems at the Fernald plant. 

   ---
   Communist Party factions argued about ways to end ethnic and social strife that has strained Yugoslavia. 
The federal president warned of "great danger" in disunity. 
It wasn't known whether the party leadership, at an emergency meeting in Belgrade, had agreed on personnel and policy changes intended to quell the recent unrest. 

   ---
   Poland's government said pro-Solidarity extremists had reduced the chances of the trade union being legalized again. 
A spokesman made the statement while confirming that talks with the banned union have been delayed until at least Monday. 
The talks had been expected to begin this week. 

   ---
   A federal panel called for universal access to prenatal care by U.S. women as a means of reducing the number of babies born diseased and handicapped. 
A two-year study by the Institute of Medicine found that such access would save taxpayer dollars, and the committee urged "a national commitment to tackle the problem." 

   ---
   Eleven Soviet inspectors watched as U.S. military personnel at an air base in Arizona began the destruction of 41 Air Force cruise missiles under the INF treaty. 
The pact calls for the elimination of all superpower intermediate-range nuclear missiles. 

   ---
   The Senate passed legislation to make the VA the 14th cabinet department. 
Reagan is expected to sign the measure. 
The chamber also approved a bill that would guarantee veterans receive the same cost-of-living adjustment as Social Security recipients. 

   ---
   Hurricane Joan churned across the Caribbean, threatening Panama, Costa Rica and Nicaragua with heavy rains and maximum sustained winds of about 90 mph. 
Flooding caused by the storm Monday in Colombia killed at least four people. 
As many as 50 people were reported missing. 

   ---
   Iraq has agreed to the exchange of prisoners taken in the Persian Gulf war, according to a letter sent to U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar. 
But Baghdad maintains that the move isn't related to talks with Iran, aimed at a permanent truce. 

   ---
   The White House dismissed the possibility of a fifth and final summit between Reagan and Soviet leader Gorbachev before the president leaves office in January. 
A Reagan spokesman said there weren't any plans currently under way for such a meeting. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
