ID: 287	RANK: 89	SCORE: 4.255646
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870331-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Japan Bars Wider Foreign Participation
In Venture on Telecommunications Link
---
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> JAPAN FORGN PAC MOT T IBM CDA UIS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A Japanese cabinet officer turned down a U.S. demand that significant foreign participation be allowed in a proposed international telecommunications venture, but U.S. officials believe his decision can be reversed. 

   In a letter to Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige last Thursday, Shunjiro Karasawa, the Japanese minister of post and telecommunications, insisted that only a single consortium should be allowed to compete against the Japanese monopoly, Kokusai Denshin Denwa, or KDD, to provide an alternative telecommunications link between Japan and the rest of the world. 

   Mr. Karasawa said his decision was dictated by the "exceedingly small market size." 
But the effect would be to require a consortium made up of Britain's Cable &amp; Wireless PLC, Pacific Telesis Group of San Francisco and some Japanese principals to merge with an all-Japanese rival group. 
Each individual participant would have to settle for a very small share in the resulting consortium, so that foreign companies wouldn't have a chance to capture much of the business. 

   Mr. Baldrige earlier sent a letter to Mr. Karasawa urging Japan to allow broader foreign competition, in keeping with a three-year-old U.S.-Japan agreement. 
In that accord, Japan agreed to allow as much as one-third foreign participation in new businesses spawned by a Japanese law designed to provide for competition in telecommunications. 
The Reagan administration has argued that forcing rival groups to merge would make it impossible to reach that goal. 

   A failure by Washington and Tokyo to resolve the telecommunications issue could sharpen congressional demands for retaliation against Japan for unfair trading practices. 
Word of Mr. Karasawa's letter comes on the heels of the Reagan administration's decision last week to impose steep tariffs on imports of certain Japanese electronic goods to punish that country for failing to live up to a semiconductor trade accord. 
Some members of Congress have expressed keen interest in the telecommunications trade issue. 

   Reagan administration officials said, however, they don't consider Mr. Karasawa's decision the end of the telecommunications matter. 
"We're still in the process of lobbying in Tokyo for a more satisfactory outcome," a U.S. trade negotiator said. 

   Sen. Frank Murkowski (R., Alaska) said that President Reagan has interceded on the telecommunications issue with Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, who is due to visit Washington April 29 to May 5. 
"The effect of (Mr. Reagan's action) won't be felt until sometime later," Sen. Murkowski said. 
The White House wouldn't confirm whether the president had taken such action. 

   The post and telecommunications ministry, which is primarily responsible for regulating Japan's telecommunications industry, has a reputation for favoring domestic companies over foreign competitors. 
But U.S. officials believe that Mr. Nakasone and other Japanese ministers could be persuaded to overrule Mr. Karasawa in order to avoid another trade clash with Washington. 

   Mr. Karasawa asserted in his letter that Japan is living up to its commitment to allow greater foreign participation in new telecommunications ventures. 
He said that Hughes Communications Inc. owns 39% of a new Japanese telecommunications satellite company and that Motorola Inc. is the second-largest shareholder in another new company that will offer radio-paging services in the Tokyo metropolitan area. 

   The Japanese minister added that American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., International Business Machines Corp., Unisys Corp. and Control Data Corp. have shares ranging from 50% to 100% in a number of specialized data-transmission companies in Japan. 

   But he claimed that because KDD and its competitors would be fighting for business that represents only 4% of the Japanese domestic telecommunications market, "only one company" could effectively compete with the current monopoly. 
Mr. Karasawa acknowledged that because the number of companies in the two groups seeking a share of the business has reached 70, individual shares would be "small." 

   Echoing the views of U.S. officials, Sen. Murkowski said he's "optimistic" that both governments can strike a deal. 
"We certainly haven't given up hope that the Japanese will see that it's in their interest to open up their markets," he said. 

   The Alaska senator expressed concern that Mr. Karasawa's decision, if allowed to stand, effectively would kill a plan by the Cable &amp; Wireless-Pacific Telesis group to lay a fiber-optic submarine cable to compete with KDD's existing copper cable linking Japan with the U.S. through Hawaii. 
The new cable would pass though Alaska and terminate in Washington state. 

   Mr. Karasawa's ministry earlier had informed U.S. officials that there wouldn't be enough transpacific business for two cables, and that the proposed consortium thus would have to share the KDD cable. 

   Sen. Murkowski argued that the U.S. has "national security" reasons for the Alaskan cable. 
He said U.S. defense units based in Alaska and the Aleutian Islands need it to back up a communications satellite, which now is their only communications link to the mainland. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
