ID: 287	RANK: 96	SCORE: 4.202660
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870527-0002 </DOCNO>
<HL> America's New-Wave Chip Firms
---
By Michael S. Malone</HL>
<DD> 05/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   An apparent rebound in the U.S. semiconductor industry, caused in part by a surge in personal-computer sales, and the recent announcement of a proposed merger between two established semiconductor companies, Advanced Micro Devices and Monolithic Memories, are two reminders that change is the only constant in the high-tech business. 
That is a good thing to remember in this time of Pacific Rim trade disputes and calls to protect our "beleaguered" domestic chip industry. 

   When one reads the numbers, the first reaction is to man the economic barricades, dredge the bottomless moat of subsidies and pour the walls for a Maginot line of tariffs. 
But if one looks closer at the apparent problems of the U.S. semiconductor industry, the suspicion grows that there are forces at work here that have nothing to do with Japanese competition. 
Worse, this growing urge toward protectionism may do greater damage than good among the semiconductor start-up companies. 

   The Japanese have been competing unfairly in the electronics industry for years. 
But we must make sure that in punishing them we don't punish ourselves even more. 
A quiz: What do RCA, Sylvania and General Electric have in common? 
They were among leading U.S. electronic component makers in 1956. 
They built vacuum tubes. 
Along came transistors, then integrated circuits, and these giants were knocked off their perches by little upstarts like Fairchild and Motorola. 
Most of these firms, in turn, were supplanted by newcomers like Intel and National Semiconductor. 

   Second question: What were the three leading U.S. auto makers in 1956? 
General Motors, Ford and Chrysler. 
In other words, there is a big difference between providing a bridge loan to an established firm in a mature industry, like Chrysler, and propping up a gaggle of companies in a volatile business like semiconductors in which they may not even be competitors tomorrow. 

   One reply might be that perhaps after 30 years of wildcatting and shoot-outs in the streets of Silicon Valley, the U.S. semiconductor industry is ready to settle down into a peaceful dotage. 
Protection then would be a sort of corporate Medicare, guarding our increasingly infirm, but still valuable, chip companies from those hooligans and young toughs across the sea. 

   If you believe that, take a look at the accompanying chart of world-wide start-ups between 1957 and 1986, prepared by a Silicon Valley market research firm, Dataquest Inc., as part of a report on semiconductor companies founded since the late-1970s (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ May 27, 1987). 
Dataquest found 134 chip-company start-ups world-wide beginning in 1977, 113 of them in the U.S. 
There were more chip companies started in the U.S. in the past 10 years than in the 25 years before that. 

   Hardly fits the image of a surviving handful of U.S. chip makers huddled behind the last unbreached breastwork, does it? 
What's more, while the rest of the U.S. electronics industry is staggering out of an extended recession, these little start-ups are growing like jungle bamboo. 
Last year, for example, Cypress Semiconductor nearly tripled its sales to $51 million. 
LSI Logic, founded in 1981, expects revenue this year to top $300 million. 
While these growth rates certainly cannot be maintained for very long, it seems possible that by the mid-1990s these firms and others will be of comparable size to their famous predecessors. 

   Sheridan Tatsuno, who co-authored the report with Penny Sue, measured a recurring 12-year to 15-year interval between start-up crests, "suggesting a technology life-cycle that progresses from initial research to commercialization to gradual decline." 
Further, he added, these sudden increases in start-ups seemed to coincide with "a rapid loss of market share among older companies that are unable to compete with startups in emerging technologies." 

   Hence, the primarily low-density, military-oriented chip houses of the '60s were overrun by the medium-density, broad-product-line firms of the '70s; and they, in their turn, are being end-run by high-density, niche-market, custom chip makers of the '80s. 
Each time, the older chip firms have grown too big and have too much invested in the old technology to risk cannibalizing themselves in a bet on the future. 
And history has left them behind. 

   So, are we really looking at a U.S. chip industry being brutalized by the predatory practices of foreign competitors? 
Or is that just camouflage for the reality of a bunch of once-famous firms now reaching the end of their business cycles? 

   Frankly, it is too early to know. 
But even that answer should be more than sufficient to make legislators step back and take a second look before charging into a Pacific Rim trade war over the semiconductor business. 
If these chip start-ups are indeed the leaders of the '90s, wouldn't it be a good idea to find out what they need? 
The Dataquest survey is a good start. 
Here are some of the facts it uncovered: 

   --While the U.S. has seen the creation of 113 semiconductor companies since 1977, Japan has seen a grand total of four. 
This is particularly remarkable when one notes that even Taiwan saw two start-ups, and Australia and Brazil one each. 
And a dozen other U.S. firms, the vanguard of a new generation of superconductor companies, are expected on the scene within a year. 

   --While 70 of the U.S. start-ups are in Silicon Valley, 23 others are in the Southwest, seven in the Northeast, and 13 in other parts of the country. 

   --In 1980, world-wide revenues of semiconductor start-ups totaled $20 million. 
By the end of this year that total will reach nearly $2 billion -- all in the teeth of one of the worst recessions the industry has ever known. 

   --Of the 113 U.S. semiconductor start-ups, more than one-third have strong affiliations (manufacturing contracts, technology transfers, joint ventures, etc.) with Asian companies, many of them Japanese. 
As Mr. Tatsuno and Ms. Sue noted, "whereas larger U.S. vendors are hesitant to enter alliances with Asian companies, start-ups are jumping into alliances en masse." 
For example, Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. of Milpitas, Calif., has technology agreements with, among others, Ricoh, Oki Electric and Exar of Japan, as well as Korea's Samsung. 

   Chips &amp; Technologies' president, Gordon A. Campbell, doesn't mince words: "One of the reasons we've seen large U.S. semiconductor corporations in deep trouble recently is that those firms failed to do what they did so well in the past: identify trends and markets. . . . 
They've developed hardening of the arteries. 
By comparison, the Japanese companies entered the semiconductor industry late; they didn't have pre-conceived notions, and they haven't had the tunnel vision U.S. companies had. 
Now, what {the large U.S. firms} are trying to do with legislation in Washington is to save these stodgy old companies that can't figure out how to compete with Japan. 
And what is really going to happen is that these new laws are going to stomp all over a lot of little companies that may be this industry's bread and butter tomorrow." 

   This new breed of semiconductor company looks almost nothing like its better-known predecessors. 
For one thing, it doesn't build much. 
Because building a fabrication laboratory is too great a capital investment -- and because the older U.S. firms aren't much interested in the work -- much of the actual manufacturing of the new U.S. chips is done at "silicon foundries" in Korea and Taiwan. 
This has led some observers to complain that the new firms are not creating enough new domestic employment. 

   Well, certainly not as much as they would with better capital-gains rules and more support from older U.S. chip companies. 
But the alternative is no jobs here at all. 
And the brainpower is remaining in the U.S. Best of all, for once the flow has reversed, and the Asians are providing the raw materials and labor and the U.S. firms are skimming off the value-added profits. 
Unfortunately -- as in the case of a U.S. chip house importing a $100 Japanese silicon wafer, then reselling the finished product domestically for 10 times the amount -- this advantage doesn't always show up in positive balance of trade. 

   All of this points to a fundamental difference between the old-line U.S. chip firms and the new wave of start-ups: a move from provincialism toward a more global perspective. 
These characteristics also suggest that the needs of the new chip companies may be fundamentally different from their well-known predecessors. 

   For one thing, their geographical diversity argues that now, without the requirement of full manufacturing facilities at every firm, it may indeed be possible to build high-tech enclaves like Silicon Valley throughout America. 
It also hints that if the government really does want to subsidize semiconductors it ought to restore those capital-gains breaks that led to the venture-capital boom that built these new firms -- or at least put the bucks up for some state-of-the-art silicon foundries here in the States. 
This recent burst of domestic semiconductor entrepreneurship is the best refutation to the claim that America's chip business is dying. 

   Meanwhile, their meager number of start-ups means the Japanese are going to fight the next round with the huge electronics firms they've already got. 
And for all their much-vaunted manufacturing prowess, there is no reason to assume those companies are any more immune to the semiconductor business cycle than our own -- particularly when, short of cutting our own throats, we make them play fair. 

   This is not to say we should ignore our older semiconductor companies. 
It is just that we should not ransom our technological future for firms that, by not remaining innovative, have become part of the past. 
If the old chip companies want to stay in business, let them adapt to the new rules. 
Finally, the quantity and quality of the many new U.S. chip firms hints that the best thing the government can do for America's semiconductor industry is what the now-crying old-line chip houses themselves asked it to do just a few years ago. 
And that is to stay out of the way. 

   ---
   Mr. Malone writes frequently on high technology. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
