ID: 209	RANK: 2	SCORE: 18.777239
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870505-0145 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Men and Women of Letters
---
By Edmund Fuller</HL>
<DD> 05/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The intimate letter as a literary form is gone. 
The technology -- one might almost add, ideology -- of reaching out and touching someone through optic fibers and satellite beams is eliminating the letter from even its simplest role of carrying a message. 
Some collections from the 19th and 20th centuries do stand out. 
There was nothing so fine in recent decades as the letters of Flannery O'Connor, published in 1979 as "The Habit of Being." 

   But the true high point of the letter as literature was reached some 300 years ago. 
We are given deep insight into that era in a slender, specialized, but rewarding, book, "The Converse of the Pen: Acts of Intimacy in the 18th-Century Familiar Letter" (University of Chicago Press, 260 pages, $11.95), by Bruce Redford. 

   The title comes from a letter by Samuel Richardson. 
The subtitle is paradoxical in that the intimacy and familiarity of such correspondence coexists with conscious craft and mannered conventions. 
It is also ironical, viewed from today. 
These "acts of intimacy" are not those relished by the readers of bed-and-bored fiction, nor is the familiarity of the kind that breeds contempt. 
"The Converse of the Pen," in the precise meaning of Hamlet's words, is "caviar to the general" -- the general run of people -- many of whom will not acquire a taste for it. 

   All devotees of Samuel Johnson, James Boswell, and their circle, know that 18th-century conversation was a performance, consciously shaped by its best practitioners of either sex, notwithstanding its improvisational nature. 
Letter writing was the sister art in "the unique craftsmanship of that age." 

   Six writers of letters are discussed by Mr. Redford, with passages from their letters in many moods, and secondary attention paid to their correspondents. 
The writers are: the prolific Lady Mary Wortley Montagu; two poets, William Cowper and Thomas Gray; the nobleman, politician, litterateur Horace Walpole; and James Boswell, biographer and keeper of journals. 
Finally, Samuel Johnson, whose letters to Mrs. Hester Thrale are called by Mr. Redford, "The 'Little Language' of the Public Moralist." 
They reveal Johnson in a mood of easy geniality unique in his writings, though later it modulates into anguish as the friendship ends, due to his disapproval of the widowed Mrs. Thrale's second marriage. 

   Although we are given many splendid excerpts, this is not a collection of complete letters but a discussion of their form, purposes and significance as revelations of character. 
This scholarly book, with many footnotes, pre-supposes a reader's familiarity with 18th-century English history and literature. 
There are many passages in French, untranslated; also, in Latin, translated except for the stray phrase. 

   Reliable report esteems Mr. Redford as a fine teacher at the University of Chicago. 
His own writing is uneven. 
At times one wishes it were de-academicized into the "easy Simplicity of Stile" in which Lady Mary Wortley Montagu was tutored. 
He rises to his best in the section on Samuel Johnson who, for all the distinctions of the others, is incomparably the enduringly great figure among those considered. 
(Mr. Redford is preparing a four-volume edition of the letters of Johnson.) 

   The account of that zealous correspondent, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, is another highlight of the book. 
Classically stoical, "She feels herself alone: a woman of superior intellect and learning who courts ridicule when she displays either; a wife of tender sensibilities married to an unresponsive husband; a friend mistrusted by most of her circle." 
With satirical wit she gives (as does Horace Walpole) wickedly funny verbal sketches of scenes and persons at the coronation of George III. 

   Least engaging are the two poets, though each strives for "the paradox of artful naturalness." 
Cowper builds a protective shell against the world, "a little Eden," in his country retreat. 
I agree with Lytton Strachey, who found Cowper's letters "stricken with sterility." 
Thomas Gray displays a literary allusiveness so compulsive that he seems to have no thoughts or phrases that are not shadows cast by someone else. 

   Mr. Redford dubs Horace Walpole "The Letter-Writer as Chameleon" (Walpole attributed such shifting stylistic coloration to himself). 
We see him in "a richly varied parade of identities: the vivacious gazetteer, the choleric politician, the equable historian, the aristocratic butterfly, and the meditative moralist" -- any or all of them, when writing to different persons about the same events. 

   "James Boswell among the 'Libertines'" deals sympathetically with the ever-ambitious, vulnerably insecure Scotsman's friendship and correspondence with Henry Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, one of the notorious rakes and great charmers of his time. 

   Boswell, watching Samuel Johnson writing to Mrs. Thrale, "wondered to see him writing so much so easily." 
It is that ease and openness that so charms in the closing chapter. 
"In all this," Johnson says in one letter, "there is nothing very memorable, but sands form the mountain." 
He promotes superbly, in Mr. Redford's words, "that sharing of experience which not only bridges a physical gap, but also turns absence into a rarefied form of presence." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
