ID: 209	RANK: 28	SCORE: 9.282784
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881115-0003 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Dickens's Life for Our Times </HL>
<AUTHOR> Richard Locke </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   "We are now ready to tackle Dickens. 
We are now ready to embrace Dickens. 
We are now ready to bask in Dickens. . . . 
With Dickens we expand." 
The speaker is Vladimir Nabokov in his lectures on "Masters of European Literature" at Cornell, known affectionately as "Dirty Lit" to the innocents of the Eisenhower age. 
At first it may seem improbable that the most vividly imperial artificer to practice in English since Joyce should praise the most popular novelist of Victorian England, indeed the most popular writer who ever lived. 
How could Nabokov, the elitist champion of High Modern Art, expostulate so warmly on behalf of the sentimental entertainer, the naive social reformer, the Father Christmas of English literature? 

   Because Nabokov's "Lolita" is perhaps the last Dickensian child: the heart of a tragicomic anatomy of culture and society. 
Because Nabokov -- like Joyce in "Ulysses," like Eliot in "The Waste Land" (which Eliot had thought to call "He Do the Police in Different Voices," a quote from "Our Mutual Friend") -- understood that Dickens's genius was for style and structures far below the melodramatic, comic or bathetic surface palpitations of his encyclopedic entertainments. 

   After the early years of our century, Dickens was taken off grandfather's shelf and reread. 
George Orwell and Edmund Wilson in the '30s and '40s, Lionel Trilling and Steven Marcus in the '50s and '60s gave us new ways to approach him. 
Today "Nicholas Nickleby" is theatrical legend, and a newly released "Little Dorritt" joins "Great Expectations," "David Copperfield" and more than a dozen others on the screen. 
Dickens is at once "Masterpiece Theatre" fodder and an academic classic -- there are Marxist, Freudian, social historical and scores of other exegetical Dickenses scampering amid footnotes and library stacks. 
He is the Shakespeare of the English novel. 

   Hence this new biography (Morrow, 607 pages, $24.95) by Fred Kaplan, whose biography of Dickens's great hero, the Victorian social critic and moralist Thomas Carlyle (dedicatee of Dickens's "Hard Times"), won much deserved praise when it appeared five years ago. 
Mr. Kaplan's life joins Edgar Johnson's 1952 biography of Dickens's "tragedy and triumph" and the highly intelligent late-19th century biography by Dickens's friend John Forster. 
It doesn't eclipse these predecessors, but it's likely to be the life for our times. 

   The quantity of new material from Dickens's letters and the attention to the minutiae of the Victorian literary business world -- which made Dickens rich -- consort easily with Mr. Kaplan's deft encapsulations of Dickens's 15 novels (his readings are psychoanalytic -- without jargon -- and sensitive to theme, image and structure). 
One finishes this large book as one finishes a long swim in Maine waters: invigorated and duly impressed by the force of the tide. 

   Charles Dickens was born in 1812 in the seaside town of Portsmouth, where his father was working as a navy payroll clerk. 
The family soon was on the move between Portsmouth, Chatham and London as the father scrambled for social status, overspent, lost his job and floundered on, announcing that "something was bound to turn up" to rescue him from ruin. 
In 1824 he finally was imprisoned for debt, and the 12-year-old Charles had to drop out of school and take a job labeling pots in a London shoe-polish factory. 

   Even after his father was released from jail, his mother saw no reason to release the boy from his humiliating confinement -- and Charles never forgave or forgot it. 
After four traumatic months in all, he was set free by his father and returned to school. 
At 15 he took a job as a law clerk and then became a court and parliamentary reporter. 
At 21 he began a series of newspaper sketches of London life and followed these "Sketches by Boz" with his early comic masterpiece, "Pickwick Papers" (1836-37). 

   He almost instantly became a celebrity and remained one until his death 34 years later. 
Dickens mirrored the age, both as "The Emperor of Cheerfulness" and, as Regency glee turned into Victorian gloom, the scourge of industrial greed, hypocrisy and self-destruction. 
While writing his novels, published in either weekly or monthly installments that eventually were bought by more than 200,000 readers, Dickens also founded an unsuccessful daily newspaper and two immensely successful weekly magazines. 
He conducted an exceptionally vigorous social life, endured an unhappy marriage with 10 children and a complex extended family, pursued an endless round of charitable enterprises, mounted private performances of amateur theatricals he often wrote himself, walked at least 10 miles a day in all weather, and made highly profitable tours of America in 1842 and 1867. 
At 46 he separated from his wife of 22 years and seems to have maintained a mistress. 
In the last nine years of his life he embarked upon a series of public readings from his novels, and he died at age 58 in 1870 of a stroke brought on by hysterical, compulsive overwork. 

   Perhaps the most impressive aspect of Mr. Kaplan's biography is its picture of Dickens's professional life and friendships: One senses anew the extraordinary competitive vigor of the Victorian imperial personality. 
Mr. Kaplan's objective presentation of the facts about the colossus of the age gives us a far better sense of its shape and scale than any facile charm might conjure up. 
His clarity is the highest form of respect and affection for his astonishing subject. 
There were indeed giants on the earth in those days. 

   ---
   Mr. Locke teaches English and comparative literature at Columbia University. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
