ID: 209	RANK: 3	SCORE: 16.482294
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861218-0176 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Boswell's Life of Boswell
---
By Edmund Fuller</HL>
<DD> 12/18/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   It is surprising to find James Boswell recording a spasm of reaction against his great, deceased friend, Samuel Johnson, upon whose "Life" he was then toiling. 
On Friday, March 7, 1788, he read Mrs. Hester Thrale Piozzi's published correspondence with Johnson. 
The former Mrs. Thrale and Boswell had always felt jealousy over each other's friendship with the lexicographer. 

   Boswell writes in his journal for that day that he is "disappointed a good deal," especially "in having proof of (Johnson's) fawning on a woman whom he did not esteem because he had luxurious living in her husband's house; and in order that this fawning might not be counteracted, treating me and other friends much more lightly than we had reason to expect. 
This publication cooled my warmth of enthusiasm for 'my illustrious friend' a good deal. 
I felt myself degraded from the consequence of an ancient Baron to the state of an humble attendant on an author; and, what vexed me, thought that my collecting so much of his conversation had made the world shun me as a dangerous companion." 

   In spite of that momentary bitterness of the Scottish baron (Laird of Auchinleck), it was as an author that he himself was happiest and holds his high place in English letters. 
One of his best friends, Edmond Malone, often "lectured me upon my intemperance and on my delaying Johnson's 'Life,' on which I was to rest my fame." 

   The passages come from "Boswell: The English Experiment, 1785-1789" (McGraw-Hill, 354 pages, illustrated, $24.95), edited by Irma S. Lustig and Frederick A. Pottle, and the next to last volume of the unparalleled journals, published in trade editions by arrangement with Yale. 
In today's jargon it could have been called "Boswell Under Stress." 

   His wife, "Peggie," the former Margaret Hamilton (her portrait is the frontispiece), was dying of consumption. 
The strains of the four years recorded here made the ordeal worse for both of them. 
Utterly unable to remain faithful to her, he still loved her dearly and excoriated himself for his weaknesses. 
Accepting an invitation to dinner, "I was inwardly shocked at my rage for pleasure, which made me leave a distressed wife, who never would have left me, even in the slightest illness." 
He rationalizes that, had he remained home, he would have "fretted and done my wife more harm than good." 

   The "experiment" of these years was his rash attempt to move, with his whole family, from his "narrow" field of law in Edinburgh to build a practice in London. 
The legal systems of Scotland and England differed greatly at that time. 
The transition was not successful. 
Ironically, his obsession to try it endorsed the rough jest Samuel Johnson addressed to him when they first met: "Sir . . . the noblest prospect which a Scotchman ever sees, is the high road that leads him to England!" 

   Not long after beginning this effort, in 1786, Boswell confided to his journal: "The truth is that imaginary London, gilded with all the brilliancy of warm fancy as I have viewed it, and London as a scene of real business, are quite different; and as the changes of fanciful sensation are very painful, it is more comfortable to have the duller sensation of reality." 
Yet he persisted in his fancy. 

   He deplored Johnson's "fawning" but is ruthless with himself as he records his own humiliating currying of favor and quest for patronage from a brusquely abrasive man, James Lowther, first Earl of Lonsdale. 
The editors rightly call the sharp characterization of Lonsdale an outstanding feature of the book. 

   Boswell's true friends are also vividly present. 
Edmond Malone, the major Shakespearean editor of the 18th century, was working on his celebrated edition of the plays. 
Yet he aided Boswell in editing and seeing through the press "The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides," published in 1785 -- Boswell's account of the famous walking trip about which Dr. Johnson also had written. 
Malone constantly exhorted Boswell to work on the "Life." 
After the biographer's death, Malone edited the third through the sixth editions of the massive work. 
Ms. Lustig justly says of Malone: "Few persons have contributed so selflessly and significantly to the work of another." 

   The best facets of Boswell's complex nature won him not only the devoted friendship of Johnson but also of such men as Malone, Sir Joshua Reynolds and John Courtenay. 
These and one or two others, who had been known as the Literary Club in Johnson's time, now took to calling themselves "the Gang." 
Their presence, with a host of other eminent persons, makes these journals an extraordinary portrait of an era in British literature, art, intellect and politics. 

   This volume closes with the well-attended funeral of Margaret Boswell, in Scotland. 
The writer and his two young sons, summoned from London, arrived too late. 
At Auchinleck, "my second daughter came running out from our house . . . in a burst of tears," with the account of Peggie's death. 
"I cried bitterly and upbraided myself for leaving her." 

   He writes: "It is not customary in Scotland for a husband to attend his wife's funeral. 
But I resolved if I possibly could to do her the last honors myself, and I was able to go through with it very decently. 
I privately read the funeral service over her coffin in the presence of my sons and was relieved by the ceremony a good deal." 

   A 14th volume yet to come will bring the Boswell chronicles to a close. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
