ID: 209	RANK: 33	SCORE: 9.169984
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870505-0162 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Closing the Book on a Reviewing Career
---
Collegial Toast
---
By Vermont Royster</HL>
<DD> 05/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Edmund Fuller, whose name and book reviews are familiar to Wall Street Journal readers, is that rarity today among writers-novelist, essayist, editor, critic, biographer, historian. 
In other words, a man of letters, a breed well known in the 19th century, but a vanishing species in the 20th. 
Nowadays most writers, even the prolific among them, are known in only one category or another. 

   For example, Edmund is the author of four novels over a span of years reaching from 1946 to 1970. 
His first, "A Star Pointed North," is durable enough to have been reprinted in 1965 as a Harper Perennial Library paperback. 
Another, "The Corridor," published by Random House in 1963, has appeared in a British edition and a Dutch-language edition. 

   His nonfiction work ranges widely, encompassing a history of the Green Mountain State, a critical study of George Bernard Shaw, a biography of John Milton and a perceptive survey of "Man in Modern Fiction" in which he compares (sadly) the changing view from former to present times as portrayed in novels. 

   As an editor he has compiled with notes and comments Samuel Johnson's "Lives of the Poets," Plutarch's "Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans," a Mark Twain reader and a selection of the great English and American essayists. 

   He has also been a teacher, in the classroom and beyond. 
He has taught at Columbia University, the New School for Social Research, St. Stephen in Rome, and, for a decade, at the Kent School in Connecticut. 

   Naturally his teaching experience resulted in textbooks. 
They include teaching editions of eight Shakespeare plays, "Four Novels for Appreciation," and an "Introduction to the Essay." 

   But enough. 
The shelf of Fuller books is sufficiently long to be impressive in both substance and variety. 
A mere listing of titles could be as tiresome as Homer's catalog of ships at the Trojan War. 
Better to read them than to name them. 

   One in particular is my favorite. 
In younger days Edmund decided to escape the "rat race" of New York where he was an editor in a publisher's office. 
He fled to a New England farm where he encountered just what you'd expect: snows, busted plumbing, recalcitrant pigs, bone-wearing labor and a cow who needed his ministrations for artificial insemination. 
Naturally he turned the experience into a delightful account, "Successful Calamity," literature from life. 

   Edmund showed up at the Journal back in 1963, still a relatively young man, bearded like a pard but already with gray hair. 
Soon, he was our chief book reviewer to the gratitude of successive book editors. 
He has written more book reviews than I care to count, all reflecting both catholic interest and impeccable taste and perception. 

   Now snowy white on top and with a Santa Claus beard, Edmund says he wants to flee this different "rat race" of newbound books piled high and regular deadlines to finish them, even though lately he has lazed along on a two-week schedule instead of every week. 
He professes he's weary even of that and wants to travel with his wife, Anne, or just loll in the Carolina sunshine where (for the second time) he's tasting rural living. 
But this time, no cows. 

   I find that retirement hard to believe. 
Lifetime habits die hard. 
I can't see him breaking the reading addiction, and I think once he succumbs to that he'll be seduced by the temptation of his typewriter. 
Or at least I hope so. 
And I hope he'll grace these pages now and then. 
If not, I'll miss his company and so will thousands of Journal readers. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is Editor Emeritus of the Journal and the one who inveigled Mr. Fuller into gracing these pages. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
