ID: 209	RANK: 35	SCORE: 9.130872
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870224-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

---
By Edmund Fuller</HL>
<DD> 02/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   However he is, or will be, appraised as a writer, Thomas Wolfe was a unique happening in 20th-century American literature. 
The huge man from Asheville, N.C., only 37 when he died, often behaved like a monster but also inspired loyalty in long-suffering friends. 
His touch of genius was a vein of ore in a mountain of rubble, a labor to extract and refine. 
In the 1930s he seemed a writer of intense appeal to youth. 
How many of today's younger readers, notoriously intolerant of descriptive prose, will accept him -- unless, ironically, as "different"? 

   David Herbert Donald, of Harvard, is an American historian and political biographer. 
He detoured from the main road of his career into an enormous labor of research and writing to produce another sort of work, "Look Homeward: A Life of Thomas Wolfe" (Little, Brown, 580 pages, illustrated, $24.95). 

   "Definitive" is a risky adjective for reviewers, but a case can be made for applying it to Prof. Donald's book. 
Fifty years have passed since Wolfe's death. 
Several earlier biographies and many literary studies of him have appeared. 
Yet Prof. Donald is the first biographer since the deaths of the last of Wolfe's intimate colleagues, friends and family members, in whose lifetimes some things could not be published. 
He has had the first access to numerous materials. 

   It is a reasonably safe guess that no more data will come to light sufficient to cause the whole Wolfean trail to be retraced. 
Prof. Donald had the cooperation of every major Wolfe scholar. 
He has had the patience and literary sensitivity to keep all this in balance, though his judgment or taste may lapse on rare occasions. 

   So detailed a narrative of Wolfe's life often seems like an extended reprise of his own writings. 
Possibly no one purporting to write fiction was ever more autobiographical than Wolfe. 
Even so, he preferred often to speak of his "books" rather than of his "novels." 
His works, in spite of his efforts to invent, revert to a telling and retelling of his immediate life experiences, associations, and observations, so literally as to create complicated editorial and legal problems. 

   A great irony was his long struggle to be a playwright, from the early days of The Carolina Playmakers at the University of North Carolina to his studies with George Pierce Baker, at Harvard. 
Baker, who taught some of America's best playwrights, liked Wolfe and believed in his talents, but time confirmed that the essential theatrical disciplines of compression and the ability to work cooperatively with many people in a production, were hopelessly alien to Wolfe's temperament. 
As a collateral irony, the most sustained love of his life was for a considerably older woman, Aline Bernstein, distinguished in the theater as costume and scene designer. 

   Prose was his medium. 
Yet his incantatory, "luxuriant dithyrambs" were often poetic and sometimes seduced editors of his posthumous publications into casting passages into blank-verse typography. 
Repeatedly he proclaimed to Maxwell Perkins, his editor at Scribners, and to Edward Aswell of Harpers, that he was about to do a kind of writing he had never done before. 
He announced grandiose objective projects, yet always returned to the same spate of personal recall. 
The astonishing thing is how well he did it in the luminous best parts of his torrents of words. 

   At moments, Prof. Donald's objectivity seems scarcely to veil a distaste for Wolfe at his behavioral worst, and readers sometimes will be repelled and impatient. 
"Paranoid" is another risky adjective, but Wolfe certainly was that, frequently. 
He made shameless scenes, public and private, when the hair-trigger of his morbid sensitivities was touched. 
Family, friends, lovers, all felt the sting of his ingrained prejudices, including the rampant anti-Semitism that exacerbated his tumultuous bond with Mrs. Bernstein. 
Sinclair Lewis said ruefully, "You couldn't be a friend of Tom's any more than you could be a friend of a hurricane." 

   In passages from Wolfe's letters to Mrs. Bernstein, and varied jottings from his notebooks, Prof. Donald occasionally steps over the boundary of what would have been better left in the archives. 
Also, he has swallowed a few legends whole, whether at second hand or from Wolfe's boasts. 
I doubt that, wandering the streets of Montreux one night with Scott Fitzgerald, Wolfe reached up and pulled down electrical wires, producing a blackout. 

   Prof. Donald argues, unconvincingly, that Wolfe was more of a controlled artist than he was generally credited with being. 
Germane to that, the hottest literary debates have been about the roles of Messrs. 
Perkins and Aswell as editors. 
Mr. Perkins knew he would be "damned for it" someday, though his work with Wolfe made publication of "Look Homeward, Angel" and "Of Time and the River" possible. 
Mr. Aswell has been harshly attacked because it fell to him to shape publishable volumes out of the mass of manuscripts left after Wolfe's shockingly sudden death, in 1937, of cerebral tuberculosis. 

   Prof. Donald examines the problems of textual authenticity, with reproaches for both editors, yet seems to agree that without them the books might never have been published at all. 
His vivid account of the writer's life and thorough analysis of the textual debates make this biography an all but indispensable companion to the future reader of the books of Thomas Wolfe. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
