ID: 209	RANK: 41	SCORE: 8.865071
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870505-0151 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Closing the Book on a Reviewing Career
---
A Critic's Notes
---
By Edmund Fuller</HL>
<DD> 05/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Of the reading of books there is no end and much reviewing is a weariness of the flesh. 
The paraphrase is too easy, but irresistible. 
For 23 1/2 years I have written columns about books for this newspaper. 
Now I feel it wise to withdraw from schedules. 
The decision rompts a few reflections. 

   It will give me a chance to read some books about which I shall have no duties, no deadlines. 
It will provide opportunity for me to put some words on paper, from time to time, without concern over whether they are ever printed. 
It will be enough if they remain as family chronicle. 
I shall not trap myself into commitments even to myself, but will let the spirit move me. 

   In a lifetime of varied mischiefs, it has fallen to me to write and to edit, as well as to review, books. 
The present thoughts, however, are preoccupied with some of what it means to read them. 
It has been argued that it is better for a person to read at any level of quality, even utter trash, than to read nothing. 
I'm not persuaded of that. 
A familiar saying, which never impressed me, is, "You are what you eat." 
Far more interestingly, as generalizations go: "You are what you read." 

   Recently, at Guilford College, not far from us in North Carolina, my wife and I heard a notable talk about education and faith by the elder statesman of American Quakers, Elton Trueblood. 
He laid special emphasis on one aspect of the printed word. 
Transcending time, space and languages of origin, it gives us the extraordinary freedom to choose the intellectual company we will keep, to select those with whom, in spirit, we will walk. 
That is a privilege. 
Moreover, to those who can see it so -- a minority, Elton Trueblood asserts -- in the highest sense it is a duty, in at least a due proportion of our reading time. 
Paraphrasing Joshua, "Choose you this day whom you will read." 

   Yet I don't want to sound solemncholy (my father made up that word, in my childhood, to go with melancholy). 
I love fantasy and romance in all their forms -- any great tale greatly told. 
I relish the masters of "nonsense" (the likes of Lewis Carroll or Edward Lear), which at its best is a fanciful form of sense. 
I like the playful and the trivial (in the spirit of Logan Pearsall Smith's "Trivia," which is not the game of the name). 
Samuel Johnson said, "There is nothing, Sir, too little for so little a creature as man." 

   It took experience to learn that, exalted as tragedy is, superb comedy is no less great. 
Building an intimacy with Shakespeare, we see his genius, in a differing mode, in his late comedies as much as in "Hamlet" or "Lear." 
Laughter at our follies, and the redemptive joy of seeing things resolved as they ought to be, are crowning human experiences. 
They teach us, also, as do such fairy tales as "Beauty and the Beast" and "The Sleeping Beauty." 
Awakening, in every sense, is a part of learning. 

   It has been my responsibility and pleasure, in these columns, to select the books I've reviewed, trying not to ride my hobbyhorses too hard, to consider diverse tastes and interests among readers. 
The choices have included novelists, dramatists, poets, historians, biographers, journalists, scientists, philosophers, as well as theologians of several faiths. 
Generally, outright trash has been avoided. 
Tricky exceptions were when I felt a point was to be made -- especially if the trash came from a writer of some literary pretensions, with the applause of a narrow establishment, so that a few voices (I've not been alone) were needed to say what the stuff really was. 
Inevitably, I remember three kinds of mistakes, the bane of every longtime reviewer: the books I overpraised, underpraised or overlooked. 

   There is another aspect of reading. 
We hear a great deal about illiteracy, the extent of which is a national disgrace. 
What we don't hear enough about is "aliteracy." 
"Aliteracy" is a recent term, which does not, to my surprise and dismay, appear in any dictionary I have at hand, including an American unabridged and the encyclopedic Oxford English Dictionary, with its latest supplements. 
Yet I have used it, have seen and heard it used, for some 10 years. 
"Aliteracy" is to literacy as "amorality" is to morality. 
It uses the prefix "a" in the sense of "without," to denote hosts of people who can read but who don't or won't. 
That is the wanton neglect, the deliberate discarding, of a heritage available to all. 

   The book is the greatest medium for general education, for the rich furnishing of a mind beyond utilitarian tools. 
Granted that in mathematics, the physical sciences, medicine and other technologies, more than the book is required. 
Yet otherwise -- an immense otherwise -- an education lies at hand to anyone willing to seize it. 
Books contain incalculable resources and rewards to fill a lifetime. 

   Finally, reviewers and readers of reviews can fall into a habit of thinking of books as the titles of the current season. 
Books are neither for one season nor for one reading. 
The good, or the great, in many genres, many languages, from any time, any where, are to be read and reread. 
You must find the limits of how much you can read, then choose some things old and some things new, and work out your own balance between them. 
We reread certain books many times across the phases of our lives and see new things in them each time. 
A good handful -- none more so than the Bible -- stays beside us through the whole of life. 

   I say goodbye to scheduled reviewing -- ambivalently, because I have loved the forum -- but not goodbye to reading. 
There's a chance that I might meet old friends now and then on this page. 
Meanwhile, to many persons who have written to me in all that time, only a few of whom I've been able to answer but all of whom deserved a reply, my apologies where due, but beyond all, my thanks. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
