ID: 209	RANK: 53	SCORE: 8.597788
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870925-0120 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Schoolyard Bully to Man of Letters
---
By Donna Rifkind</HL>
<DD> 09/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Evelyn Waugh was said to be the most English of Englishmen. 
As a child he was an especially fearsome specimen of that country's youth; his schoolmate Cecil Beaton remembered him as having a "diabolical stare" - -and a keen delight in sticking Beaton with pins. 
Describing how this schoolyard bully developed into a man now considered to be one of the best 20th-century novelists is Martin Stannard's task in "Evelyn Waugh: The Early Years 1903-1939," (Norton, 537 pages, $24.95), the first hefty volume of a two-part biography. 

   There is no shortage of material already available about Waugh. 
His friend Christopher Sykes published a lively, affectionate, but critical biography in 1975. 
There are extensive volumes of letters and diaries, and plenty of portraits of the artist in memoirs published by his friends. 
Mr. Stannard's own "Evelyn Waugh: The Critical Heritage," a discussion of Waugh's books, itself exceeds 500 pages. 
In this new work, Mr. Stannard, a lecturer in English literature at the University of Leicester, aims to be definitive. 

   Waugh was the second son of solidly middle-class parents. 
His father was managing director of the publishing house Chapman and Hall; his brother Alec became a popular novelist and travel writer. 
Evelyn, however, preferred the fine arts to literature, and studied both illustration and cabinetmaking. 
He only became a writer in his early 20s because he needed the money, and because the first evidence of his prodigious talent made him almost instantly famous. 
In 1928, at age 25, after a brief, disastrous career as a schoolmaster, he published a well-received biography of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and in the same year his first novel, "Decline and Fall," appeared amid high praise. 
When his next novel, "Vile Bodies," was published in 1930 it was an immediate best seller. 

   As a writer Waugh was a popular figure from the outset, but as a man he was somewhat less attractive. 
Throughout his life he retained his habit of bullying; he could be unaccountably malicious to anyone he thought foolish or boring. 
The failure of his first marriage to Evelyn Gardner in 1930 contributed to his bleak view of the sophisticated, degenerate society people whom he both criticized and longed to be accepted by. 
He hated nearly everything about their way of life. 

   In September 1930 he became a Catholic, having decided that the only way for him to combat the savagery and disarray in both 20th-century life and in his own pugnacious personality was by trying to live according to the absolute standards of the church. 
His religion strengthened an already half-developed point of view: from the next world looking down on this one. 
At that distance nearly everything looked tawdry and comical, waiting to be used as material for his particularly burlesque art. 

   Waugh had the reactionary's love of order and control. 
In literature and architecture he valued craft above all other virtues; he fashioned prose as carefully as a cabinetmaker handles wood. 
Within that disciplined framework, he loved what he called "panache" -- anything that added an eccentric charm and variety to everyday existence. 

   "The artist's only service to the disintegrated society of today," Waugh wrote, "is to create little independent systems of order of his own." 
He developed a similarly independent, highly personal set of politics at a young age that remained consistent throughout his life. 
He was a conservative, but remained skeptical of almost all forms of government; he loved orderliness, but recognized the limitations of excessive bureaucratic rigidity. 
As Mr. Stannard points out, his political judgments were often made on aesthetic grounds, which sometimes resulted in extremely idiosyncratic views, and his conservatism, like his attitude toward people, consisted mainly of dislikes. 
Most important to him as a writer was his belief that political theories (especially Marxist ones) have no place in art, which should exist for itself and not for didactic purposes. 

   Mr. Stannard takes his narrative up to Waugh's second marriage in 1937 to Laura Herbert (a first cousin of his first wife), through various trips to Africa, British Guiana and Mexico, each of which provided material for both his fiction and nonfiction, and he ends with the outbreak of World War II, in which Waugh served as a naval officer. 
He corrects errors made by Mr. Sykes and others with an overtly grim satisfaction, in prose that is methodical, almost dogged, and packed with details. 
His attitude toward his subject is carefully admiring of the man's work and carefully critical of the man. 
At times he seems reprimanding, at other times protective. 

   Readers already familiar with Waugh's life and work will find this new book valuable for its exhaustive details, and for its often penetrating if dry analyses of the author's relationships with his family and friends. 
For a biography of this difficult artist that captures the man's spirit, the ingenious sparkle that subdued his enemies and found its way into all those marvelous novels, readers unfamiliar with Waugh may prefer Mr. Sykes's less exacting volume. 
What Mr. Stannard gains in accuracy he loses in panache. 

   ---
   Miss Rifkind is assistant managing editor of the New Criterion. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
