ID: 209	RANK: 69	SCORE: 8.204953
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880502-0020 </DOCNO>
<HL> Writers Who Adopt Pseudonyms Are Rarely Motivated by Principle </HL>
<AUTHOR> Cynthia Crossen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PUB </IN>
<TEXT>
   If you knew the above name was fictitious, would you really care? 

   Since you probably suspect that this story isn't going to turn into a personal attack on you, the answer is likely to be no. 
You may not even have noticed the name. 
If, however, this story becomes a savage indictment of your life, then you're going to want to know just who I am. 

   That's how Joan Rivers, the comedian, felt after reading a story in GQ magazine late last year. 
Written under the pseudonym Bert Hacker, the article alleged that Ms. Rivers had made disparaging remarks about her husband shortly before he committed suicide and that she subsequently tried to exploit his death for publicity. 
Ms. Rivers filed a $50 million libel suit against Conde Nast Publications Inc., GQ's parent, and offered a $5,000 reward for the unmasking of Mr. Hacker. 
He turns out to be Benjamin Stein, a former Nixon speechwriter and editorial-page writer for this newspaper. 

   Writers have long used pseudonyms to protect themselves from cultural and political censure. 
Mary Ann Evans (George Eliot) and Baronne Dudevant (George Sand) used them in the 19th century because women weren't supposed to be novelists; in the 1950s, blacklisted Hollywood writers disguised their identities so they could work. 
Even now, a number of writers use them. 
But today, pseudonyms are more likely to be employed for convenience or career anxiety than because of lofty principles or fear of serious retribution. 

   Mr. Stein argues that there were "sound reasons" for pseudonymity, including protecting the identity of his sources. 
But another reason, he says, was "I didn't want people to think of me as a gossip columnist once this piece appeared, because I'm not." 
Mr. Stein says he had recently read a biography of Samuel Johnson, who wrote under several pseudonyms. 
"I thought if it was OK for Samuel Johnson, it was OK for me," he says. 
Conde Nast declines to comment on the suit. 

   The law is clear about pseudonymity and anonymity: Neither protects publishers from libel claims if the allegations are proven to be untrue and malicious. 
What isn't so clear is the ethics of allowing writers, especially of critical articles, to disguise their identities. 
While some journalists believe there will always be compelling reasons to use pseudonyms -- and the touchier the story, the more likely the camouflage -- others condemn the practice as undermining the credibility and accountability of the media. 

   "It's very questionable," says Everette Dennis, executive director of the Gannett Center for Media Studies at Columbia University. 
"The reason writers put their names on stories at all is to show that they stand by the information there. 
If someone's hiding their identity for any reason, why should there be a byline at all? 
That's more honest." 

   Last year, the Miami Herald chose not to identify the authors of a series on drug trafficking because the editors believed the reporters' lives might be in danger. 
Many first-person accounts of drug abuse, alcoholism, homosexuality or criminality probably wouldn't be published if authors couldn't use pseudonyms. 

   But in the case of Chris Hanson, a Reuters reporter in Washington who uses the name William Boot on a regular column in the Columbia Journalism Review, the use of a pseudonym merely satisfied his employer's restrictions on free-lance writing. 
Because Reuters doesn't like its reporters to write elsewhere under their own names, Mr. Hanson signs his column with the name of a character in Evelyn Waugh's novel "Scoop." 

   Mr. Hanson says his pseudonymity quickly became an open secret, and that's the way he likes it. 
"If people can't find out with a call or two who the author is, then you probably shouldn't be using a pseudonym," he says. 

   Similarly, Lyle Denniston, now Supreme Court correspondent for the Baltimore Sun, used the pseudonym Charles White (a combination of the names of two American Lawyer executives' dogs) on a column in American Lawyer magazine because he was then working at the Washington Star. 
"I did it so I could free-lance without getting clearance from superiors," Mr. Denniston says. 

   Perhaps the most common reason for using a pseudonym is fear of reprisals from wounded targets. 
Spy magazine, which takes ad hominem attacks to witty new lows, uses pseudonyms on two regular columns. 
One of them, usually assaulting the New York Times, is signed J.J. Hunsecker, the gossip columnist in the movie "Sweet Smell of Success." 
Another column, Review of Reviewers, is signed Michele Bennett, actually the wife of former Haitian dictator Jean Claude Duvalier. 

   Although Kurt Andersen, co-editor of Spy, says he prefers that writers use their real names, he defends these pseudonyms. 
In the case of J.J. Hunsecker and the Times, he says, "it would be dangerous to do otherwise in a city where the cultural agenda is set by the institution he's writing about." 
With Michele Bennett, who critiques critics, "the writer didn't want to burn a hundred bridges simultaneously every month," Mr. Andersen says. 

   Leon Wieseltier, literary editor of the New Republic, used the name Tristan Vox on a column in Vanity Fair magazine for several months to see if a different name would give him a different voice. 
"I failed," he says. 
The experiment ended after Mr. Wieseltier pseudonymously published a nasty attack on the writer Nora Ephron. 
"It occurred to me after that column that it wasn't fair to the person who was being attacked, and it wasn't fair to me," he says, "because I would have written the same under my own name and wasn't afraid of that." 

   Many reviewers like the idea that pseudonyms make them seem more mysterious and all-knowing than they really are. 
Partly to convey that omniscience, Daniel Okrent, editor of New England Monthly, allows four writers who review college professors to use the byline Scholasticus. 
But Mr. Okrent says the pseudonym worries him enough that he's more vigilant in reading and checking the stories. 
"The author may be able to hide, but the magazine can't," he says. 
"I have to be able to say, 'I'm your accuser.'" 

   Geoffrey Stokes, who writes a food column for the Village Voice under the pseudonym Vladimir Estragon, says he adopted the name to protect his family from embarrassment, since he often uses anecdotes from home in his pieces. 
Mr. Stokes, who grew up in the same small town as a well-known writer, remembers that the writer occasionally wrote about her daughters. 
Once, he says, this writer mentioned her daughter's "tiny A-cup bra" in print. 
"We made that child's life hell," Mr. Stokes says. 
"I thought I would give my own children deniability." 

   For Mr. Stokes, using a pseudonym is liberating. 
"In a certain way, it frees me up from having to tell the literal truth," he says. 
"I can exaggerate." 

   Mr. Denniston, however, found the practice inhibiting and troubling while writing for American Lawyer. 
"I couldn't do any reporting or have any contact with the people I was writing about," he says. 
"It kept me from doing even the most minimal fact-checking. 
I don't think I'd ever do it again." 

   But Mr. Denniston doesn't think most readers care, or even notice, the names on stories. 
"I don't think people consult the bylines to determine if they'll believe the story more or less," he says. 
"Bylines mainly exist for the ego of the writer." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
