ID: 209	RANK: 80	SCORE: 7.986523
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870821-0126 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
A Banker in the Thick of Almost Everything
---
By Charles P. Kindleberger</HL>
<DD> 08/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "A Man of Influence: The Extraordinary Career of S.G. Warburg" (Adler &amp; Adler, 380 pages, $22.50) is primarily a biography of Siegmund G. Warburg (1902-1982), an innovative and creative financier who left the bank of his cousin, M.M. Warburg, in Hamburg in 1933, and built in London a leading merchant bank with world-wide operations and influence. 
In addition, the book provides a potted history of banking and finance in Germany from the 1850s to 1945 and in the rest of the world thereafter. 

   The author, Jacques Attali, is a French economist with a wide knowledge of international finance and the personal influence that comes to a close adviser of President Francois Mitterrand. 
He attends such conferences as the Kemp-Bradley summit on exchange rates, has strong ideas on gold, fixed exchange rates and the like, and a brisk style that relies on a succession of short declarative sentences (at least in Barbara Ellis's translation). 
He has read fairly widely, and has had access to some of Siegmund Warburg's papers. 

   As a Frenchman, Mr. Attali might have been thought to be objective about the career of a German Jew in England, but in this observer's view he greatly exaggerates the roles of the Warburgs in financial history. 
His admiration for the prescience and personality of his hero grows wearisome. 
Warburg was not only "one of the most brilliant men of this century," but also, with Hermann Abs of Deutsche Bank, one of "the leading bankers in Europe," or, along with Jean Monnet, "one of the greatest men of influence of this century." 
The banking remark may be just, and "men of influence" may implicitly exclude holders of political office such as Churchill, de Gaulle, Hitler and Roosevelt. 
For brilliance, however, try Einstein and Keynes. 

   It is tempting to fault some of Mr. Attali's details. 
He asserts falsely that Benjamin Strong, governor of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, was the son-in-law of J.P. Morgan. 
And he states that the Hamburg Warburg bank arranged the silver train that relieved Hamburg's liquidity crisis of 1857, ignoring the crucial roles played by the Hamburg Senate and the Austrian government. 
He also makes the misleading claim that Max Warburg of Hamburg was intimate with the kaiser, when the Berliners Joseph Mendelsohn and Samuel Bleichroeder were the leading court Jews. 
But even their "intimacy" got them only as far as lunch with their ruler. 
They were rigorously excluded from dinner, as Fritz Stern points out in his magisterial biography of Bleichroeder, "Gold and Iron." 

   It is just wrong to say that the Bank for International Settlements distributed American loans in Europe in 1947. 
Mr. Attali is similarly misinformed when he writes that Henry Morgenthau stayed on as secretary of the Treasury after Roosevelt's death. 
And Thomas Dewey was not, as the author claims, a member of the law firm Cravath, Henderson &amp; Gersdorff. 
He practiced at Root, Clark, Buckner &amp; Ballantine, later known as Dewey, Ballantine. 
No doubt these are trivial matters, but they awaken doubt about Mr. Attali's treatment of more substantial questions. 

   So do continual reminders of S.G. Warburg's infinite charm, patience, passion, persuasion, of his capacity for work, his leadership, his success in recruiting subordinates, his hatred of the conformity, mediocrity and stuffiness of British high society, his obsession for knowing everything, and his amazing capacity to foresee all the major changes in the world from 1930 to 1982, including the rise of Hitler, the decline of sterling and later the dollar, the rise of Japan, the failure of the interest equalization tax, the Third World debt crisis, and on and on. 

   Mr. Attali insists that Warburg was a close friend of Deutsche Bank's Mr. Abs, but Warburg's name does not figure among the more than 400 names in the index of a biography of Mr. Abs. 
Similarly, Mr. Attali's 10-page account of Warburg's key role in the 1967 sterling devaluation sits oddly next to the complete silence about Warburg in the authoritative book on the subject by Sir Alec Cairncross, an insider, and Barry Eichengreen. 
Mr. Attali's own source notes further undercut his reliability, because so many of them give titles but no page references. 

   Let me conclude, nevertheless, by saying that Mr. Attali's account of the many changes in international finance that occurred during Warburg's London years, in most of which he had a leading role -- Eurodollars, Eurobonds, floating-rate notes, hostile takeovers, the emergence of Japan as a financial power, the merging of banking and investment houses -- makes for engrossing reading. 
And even after Mr. Attali's more hyperbolic claims for him have been suitably discounted, Warburg remains a multifaceted man of genius influential in the development of recent financial institutions and, to some extent at least, in the course of financial policy. 

   ---
   Mr. Kindleberger is professor of economics emeritus at M.I.T. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
