ID: 209	RANK: 95	SCORE: 7.773527
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880802-0170 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: The Final Indignity </HL>
<AUTHOR> Raymond Sokolov </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Jean Stafford wrote too little and drank too much. 
That is the short and the long of it. 
And I doubt she would quarrel with that view if she were still alive and, inevitably, kicking. 
Jean was a tough bird, toughest on herself. 
After she passed the age of 60 and it was clear to her that she was too sick and weak and distracted to write anything up to her high standards, she turned her lethal irony on herself. 
By the time I met her in 1975, as the biographer of her third husband, the New Yorker writer A.J. Liebling, Jean was a physical wreck, sipping bourbon and milk in her East Hampton living room, gaunt, with a face literally smashed in 30 years before by her first husband, Robert Lowell. 

   Not yet the famous poet, Lowell had driven their car into a wall and then basically dropped out of sight while the doctors tried to refashion Stafford's nose. 
After they were married, he smashed her nose again, this time with his fist. 

   If you want an orderly account of these and the other mostly disorderly events in Jean Stafford's life, you may now turn to "Jean Stafford: A Biography" (Little, Brown, 442 pages, $24.95) by David Roberts. 
Mr. Roberts has left few stones unturned and has found slugs and maggots under most of them. 
It is a grim life, beginning and ending in misery. 
Jean's father was a failed writer who lost his inheritance in the stock market and then refused to work on anything but hopeless literary projects. 
Young Jean escaped her family into literature and into a fast crowd she found at the University of Colorado. 
Mr. Roberts's careful documentation and sedulous interviewing of surviving friends turns up evidence of what used to be called free love and other forms of debauchery. 
Should you want to know what can reliably be known about Jean's defloration at CU, Mr. Roberts has got the goods. 

   He was lucky as a biographer in finding Robert Hightower a willing source. 
Mr. Hightower, a distinguished scholar of Asia at Harvard, was briefly a lover and then a confidant of Jean's for decades. 
He talked to Mr. Roberts about the most intimate matters and also gave him free access to his 591-page correspondence with Stafford. 
Many other people were happy to talk to Mr. Roberts about such things as finding Jean dead drunk on the floor or getting phone calls from her while she was in the middle of auditory hallucinations after yet another bender. (My book is a source for Jean's unproductive but often happy years with Liebling.) 

   Mr. Roberts also is meticulously accurate in his description of Jean's difficulties in speaking and writing after a stroke in 1976 left her almost completely aphasic. 
I can vouch for this account, since I was in contact with Jean at that point and witnessed the reduction of one of the most wittily articulate people anyone has ever known into a tortured prisoner of her own mind, unable even to say yes or no reliably. 
Mr. Roberts also does his biographer's duty about Jean's pulmonary illness, her inability (or refusal?) to stop smoking, her bad temper toward nurses, and the fires she caused, presumably from smoking while drunk. 

   Was this trip necessary? 
Does the world really need a long and thorough -- and thoroughly demoralizing -- biography of Jean Stafford? 
Her fiction has made its own way into the canon of mid-century writing that will probably survive. 
She also produced remarkable journalism, in particular a long interview with Lee Harvey Oswald's mother. 
Perhaps this, her other pieces and some of her book reviews should be reprinted. 
All of Jean's best writing should be preserved. 
But did its quality demand a full-dress life? 

   For years, I have been refusing to cooperate with would-be Stafford biographers, on the grounds that Jean's shade should be left in peace. 
I thought, and this book confirms my suspicion, that the story of this determined recluse was too wretched to bear repeating in public. 
Even after all the dredging he has done, Mr. Roberts tells us almost nothing that illuminates Jean's work, except in a superficial way. 
Mr. Roberts makes little attempt to perform literary analysis, and the literary quality of his own writing would have given Jean Stafford the screaming meemies. 

   It is the final indignity of her tattered, brave, grandiloquent life that she's had herself immortalized in threadbare prose by a hack. 
"If," Mr. Roberts writes, "Stafford had had syphilis and could not be certain it was cured, then to go to bed with a man was a deed freighted with terrible consequences." 
While spending months recovering from a mental breakdown at the Payne Whitney clinic in New York, Stafford, we read, "eschewed badminton and ping pong." 
From her frequent stints in what she cheerfully called the booby hatch, Mr. Roberts asserts that Jean "derived a soothing psychological balm." 

   Jean would have found that phrase a most unsoothing balm. 
She lived and died for words, for words that were witty and sharp. 
In her kitchen, she had posted a little notice she must have brought back from one of her visits to Germany. 
It had on it the black silhouette of a man on a bicycle carrying a ladder, captioned: "Morgen kommt der Schornsteinfeger." 
In English: "Tomorrow the chimney sweep is coming." 
The English is flat, but the German, combined with the picture, is a hilarious example of German's ominous, polysyllabic spirit -- just the thing that would have amused Jean in Germany. 
Mr. Roberts's clumsy, cliche-ridden sentences would have given her an attack of what she called the fantods. 
Once, coming out of a performance of Shakespeare, she wheeled on someone who was praising the play's costumes. 
"And," she hissed, "It was so well WRIT-TEN." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
