ID: 169	RANK: 11	SCORE: 21.721790
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870415-0074 </DOCNO>
<HL> These Innkeepers
Worry When Guests
Go Out for a Walk
---
They Realize the Destination
May Be the North Pole;
Sleds and Satellite Beacons
---
By Michael T. Malloy
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CANDA </IN>
<DATELINE> RESOLUTE, Northwest Territories  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
     this remote outpost,
Bezal and Terry Jesudason sometimes worry when their guests
leave their snug little tourist home to go on excursions.
   Lately they have been making radio contact with a guest who checked out early last month for a 600-mile walk across the Arctic ice to Greenland. 
By satellite they keep in touch with other customers who are trekking by snowmobile and motorcycle to the North Pole, 1,050 miles away. 

   "The people that finally come this far north are very special, and we can't help but worry about them as individuals," Terry Jesudason says. 
Her "most fearful moment" was in 1982 when a chartered plane sank through the ice and left a group of shivering tourists stranded near the pole. 
Luckily the weather was good, and a backup plane rescued the group within a few hours. 

   Bezal Jesudason (pronounced BAY-z'l jay-zoo-DAH-s'n) is a small, dark, enthusiastic immigrant from steamy south India, but he can build an igloo, skin a seal and speak the language of the Inuit, Canada's Eskimos. 
While his wife looks after their six-room International Explorer's Home, he leads packaged adventure tours across the ice to such unlikely destinations as the north magnetic pole. 

   "I'd be more afraid to be run over or mugged in New York than to walk around in the Arctic," Mr. Jesudason says, but he disapproves when guests like Japanese hiker Mitsuro Oba insist on traveling alone. 

   "Oba-san, many dangers!" 
Mr. Jesudason warns, pantomiming an angry bear for his Greenland-bound customer, who doesn't speak much English. 
Mr. Jesudason says that Mr. Oba's supply of seal meat will lure polar bears from a dozen miles away, possibly when he is asleep. 
But Mr. Oba, who once floated down the Amazon on a homemade raft, seems to think bear trouble will help his career as a professional adventurer. 
"Nice pictures," he replies, clicking an imaginary camera at his host's imaginary bear. 

   Resolute is one of the harshest places on earth. 
Winter temperatures reach 60 degrees below zero Fahrenheit. 
Snow falls in August. 
The only civilian settlement on the continent that is farther north is a little Inuit village on Ellesmere Island named Grise Fiord. 
That is where Bezal, now 46, met Terry, now 38. 

   Mr. Jesudason, a mechanical engineer, had recently immigrated to Canada when he signed up in 1969 for a federal job maintaining electric-power plants in the Arctic. 
"I didn't even know that there weren't any trees up here," he recalls. 
He hunted seal and caribou with his Inuit neighbors and grew to love the life. 

   Mrs. Jesudason was adventurous in a different way. 
A Canadian, she was working as a secretary in her native British Columbia when neighbors returned from a geologic assignment in the Arctic. 
They told her about the difficulties that Inuit-speaking children faced in English-language schools when they entered the first grade. 
So she paid her own way to Grise Fiord and used her savings to set up its first kindergarten. 

   The couple soon met, and they married in 1971. 
Most residents of the high Arctic rent their homes from the government, but the Jesudasons built the first private house in Grise Fiord. 
There was no hotel there then, so the community's few visitors took to staying with the gregarious young couple. 
One frequent guest was Japanese adventurer Naomi Uemura, who in 1978 revived world-wide interest in polar travel by making the first one-man expedition to the North Pole. 

   Not long after that, when Mr. Jesudason was showing home movies of outdoor life with the Inuit, several tourists told him Americans would pay to go on such wilderness adventures. 
He soon quit his government job and formed High Arctic International Explorer Services Ltd. to run snowmobile and camping expeditions out of Resolute, the northernmost point in Canada with regular jet service-four flights a week. 
He and his wife bought two abandoned village houses here and nailed them together into a modest home with several extra bedrooms. 

   "We thought we'd just do our own trips and accommodate our own guests," Mrs. Jesudason says, "but because this is the transport center of the Arctic we started getting scientists and media people and independent expeditions." 
Soon the territorial government insisted the Jesudasons get a tourist-home license. 

   The license was an early sign of what the Jesudasons see as the baleful descent of big-city bureaucracy on one of the world's last frontiers. 
"You couldn't afford to stay here," Mrs. Jesudason says, if she and her husband provided, and heated, the minimum amount of living space that regulations require for each guest. 
She won't put an "exit" sign on her kitchen door, either. 
Not homey enough. 

   The Jesudasons charge about $74 a day for room and board. 
"From February to September we make a profit and we live off our fat for the rest of the year," Mr. Jesudason says. 
When 24-hour darkness covers Resolute in midwinter, the Jesudasons go on a long vacation someplace warmer. 
They have been several times to Mr. Jesudason's sweltering hometown of Madras. 
"Such a beautiful climate," says his wife. 

   Before the sun returns to Resolute, in February, Mr. Jesudason begins building sleds and recruiting Inuit guides for the season's visitors. 
His wife starts making her grocery list; she will have about 12,000 pounds of canned goods, soap and sundries on the annual ship that calls here in late summer. 
It costs about 59 cents a pound to fly in anything she forgets, or fresh lettuce for a salad. 
She pays more than $2 a quart for milk, about $2.60 for a dozen eggs. 

   Food from Mrs. Jesudason's cheerful white-and-yellow kitchen runs toward hearty beef and potatoes, occasionally enlivened with her musk-ox stew or Mr. Jesudason's Indian curry. 
Guests sometimes have to share their rooms with strangers, and there are no private baths. 
Three expeditions to the North Pole are booked into the guest house this season. 

   The guests can be fascinating. 
Neil Armstrong, the first man on the moon, has stayed here. 
So has Sir Edmund Hillary, conqueror of Mount Everest. 
Mrs. Jesudason corresponds with former guests in 40 countries. 
With friends in every time zone, she has to take the telephone off the hook at night to get some sleep. 

   Mr. Jesudason doesn't take his own tour groups as far as the North Pole, but he provides equipment, hot showers and the benefit of his long experience to adventurers who are headed there. 
"Any of the expeditions going up there use him as logistics master," says Richard Hamburg, a tourism official with the territorial government and a 20-year Arctic veteran. 
"If he doesn't know about it, nobody does." 

   Need an Eskimo guide, a hunting rifle or a heated workshop for repairing a dog sled? 
Mr. Jesudason has all that. 
How about a knapsack-sized satellite navigation beacon that reports your precise location to his personal computer, by way of a U.S. weather satellite and a scientific agency in France? 
Most polar expeditions rent one from Mr. Jesudason, then call him every day by radio to find out where they are on the featureless Arctic Ocean. 

   "If you combine 20th-century technology and Inuit culture," Mr. Jesudason says of the boom in North Pole expeditions, "you can bring any kind of dream to life." 

   But he sees more bureaucratic snakes in his frozen Eden. 
There is a campaign afoot to change local place names from English to Inuit, so that Resolute could become Qausuittuq or maybe Kaujuitoq. 
And the federal and territorial governments plan to establish the world's northernmost national park on Ellesmere Island, where Mr. Jesudason runs expensive camping trips. 

   "The government doesn't understand that the kind of people who come here want to feel they are walking where nobody stepped before," Mr. Jesudason complains. 
"They won't come if they see footpaths and a sign saying 'Welcome to Our National Park.'" 

   And Qausuittuq? 
"I'll fight it all the way," he says. 
"Nobody will come to a place they can't spell or pronounce." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
