ID: 169	RANK: 46	SCORE: 11.228802
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871228-0058 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Prospect of New Oil Development
Again Divides the Natives of Alaska
---
By Robert E. Taylor
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
PETROLEUM (PET)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> KAKTOVIK, Alaska  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Like the Brooks Range rearing up behind this little Eskimo village on the Beaufort Sea, the prospect of vast new oil development now looms over Alaska's North Slope. 
It is a prospect full of both promise and threat, one that has divided the state's natives before and now divides them again. 

   Many Eskimos and Indians fear oil's potential impact on the environment, on the animals that are their subsistence and on a native way of life already undermined and collapsing. 
But with few exceptions, even those who harbor these fears are swallowing them and throwing in with the oil men. 
There is simply too much money to be made, especially when native corporations all over the state have been faltering and the dividends they paid have been drying up. 

   The oil companies, with the support of the Interior Department, want Congress to let them drill on the 1.5 million-acre coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. 
By some estimates, there is one chance in five that this strip contains major reserves -- perhaps more than a third as much as the colossal nine billion-barrel deposit found 100 miles west at Prudhoe Bay in 1968. 

   Another huge strike here would maintain and accelerate the flow of comforts and luxuries that many natives have grown accustomed to, and make some of them very rich indeed. 
"The sky would be the limit," says Dan Fauske, the director of finance and administration for the North Slope Borough, the government unit that spans northern Alaska. 
A lawyer for one native group says a find would make its members "the Hunt brothers of the 21st century." 

   Some natives' willingness to have more oil development also reflects worry about declining industry investment at Prudhoe. 
The tax revenues of North Slope Borough have fallen by $20 million this year, forcing the borough to cut salaries and construction. 
And the borough figures that half its present tax base will be gone in 12 more years. 
Without more oil development, many fear, the slope will revert to what one native leader calls "a lonely Arctic ghetto." 

   In the Eskimo town of Barrow, Warren Matumeak recalls the hard times of his youth in a tiny makeshift house with seal-blubber heat and seal-oil light. 
Native youngsters had to attend government boarding schools far away. 
He has no longing for the old Barrow. 
"My God," he says, "we love the TV, we love the schools, we love the gym. . . . 
Without development we can't pay for them." 

   Land swaps between the Interior Department and native corporations have broadened support for development by giving more natives a direct stake in it. 
The first swap occurred in 1983 when Arctic Slope Region Inc. exchanged land it held in the Brooks Range for mineral rights on 93,000 acres here at Kaktovik, in the middle of the potentially oil-rich coastal plain. 

   The regional corporation then leased the rights to a group headed by Chevron Corp. for a $25 million bonus. 
Arctic Slope will get $12 million more if Congress opens the plain to drilling and a bonanza from royalties if a big strike is made. 
Since then, at least six other native corporations around the state have taken on oil-company partners and have contracted to swap 891,000 acres of their lands for mineral rights controlled by the Interior Department on 166,000 acres of the plain. 

   These later swaps, however, have been furiously opposed by influential members of Congress, and the Interior Department has at least temporarily shelved plans to submit them to Congress for approval. 
Democratic Rep. George Miller of California calls them a "subterfuge" aimed at forcing the opening of the coastal plain and a "giveaway" of valuable public lands. 
Other foes include environmentalists, who don't want the plain drilled, and the state, which would share income from federal leases but not from native ones. 

   So the natives wait, many of them still ambivalent about more oil but increasingly dependent on it. 
In Kaktovik, a hamlet of 210 souls, money from Prudhoe's development has replaced all the dog sleds with snowmobiles. 
It has built a school with computer classes, a big gym and a swimming pool; modern homes with phones, TV sets and microwave ovens; and a medical clinic. 
And the village corporation, which has 114 shareholders, has received $2.4 million in land-access payments from the Chevron group. 

   But villagers initially opposed development at Prudhoe Bay, and Mayor Loren Ahlers said many argued against the latest developments at "hundreds" of meetings. 
The village "just got burned out" in argument, he adds, and joined forces with big oil only after losing hope that it could be blocked. 

   People in the Indian town of Arctic Village, across the Brooks Range from Kaktovik, have nothing to gain from oil development and still resist it. 
The village subsists on the huge caribou herd that winters over a vast expanse but whose calving grounds lie on the plain near Kaktovik. 
The villagers fear that oil development might decimate the herd or disrupt its migration. 

   "How would the rest of the country like it if we took away all their meat?" demands villager Edward Sam. 
Village chief Lincoln Tritt adds: "To us, this isn't an environmental issue or an energy issue. 
It's an issue of survival." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
