ID: 169	RANK: 6	SCORE: 28.394499
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890728-0124 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890728 </DD>
<AN> 890728-0124. </AN>
<HL> Enterprise:
@  Eskimo Artists Thrive With Modern Business Methods
@  ---
@  Experience of Inuit Indians May
@  Be Guide for Other Ethnic Groups
@  ----
@  By Udayan Gupta
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 07/28/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> CANDA </CO>
<TEXT>
   When Simon Tookoome began selling his drawings in the late 1960s, he was lucky to command $5 or $10 each. 
Today, the 55-year-old Canadian Eskimo routinely sells each drawing through his local cooperative at Baker Lake, in Canada's Arctic, for $300 or more. 

   Many Canadian Eskimos (or Inuit, as they call themselves) once earned a living mainly by hunting and trapping. 
Today, they are thriving as artists, some earning in excess of $100,000 annually. 

   A whalebone drummer by Inuk David Atchealak fetched over $37,000 at a recent art auction at Waddington's in Toronto, the highest price reportedly ever paid for an Inuit work. 
Corporations such as Toronto Dominion Bank and Rothman's Inc. boast large Inuit art collections. 
And Amway Corp.'s Japanese subsidiary recently put up $1 million to sponsor an exhibit by Inuit artists that opened in New York in June. 

   The Inuit artists are prospering because they are using modern business methods to solve their core problem: the producing and marketing of art in the far-flung Arctic. 
They own and operate small co-op businesses that collect their work and sell it to "southern" dealers and buyers in North America and abroad. 

   As such, the Inuit experience may serve as a guide to other groups trying to profit from ethnic arts and crafts. 
Indeed, American Indian groups seem to have enjoyed their biggest commercial success when they went the co-op route. 
And the success stories have begun attracting investors, most notably big Japanese financial houses, including Daiwa Securities Corp. 

   It is the all-encompassing nature of the 1980s-style cooperatives that has made them effective. 
They don't just peddle art. 
They stockpile raw material for the artists for the cold winter months when the region is impassable. 
They collect key data on prices and market trends and act as auditors and bookkeepers. 
Regularly, they organize workshops to help artists with new design ideas and new media. 
And, in the beginning, by regulating production and the quality of prints, they also helped maintain a high level of prices. 

   But success also has hurt the Inuit co-ops. 
Many of the top artists they helped establish have defected, choosing to deal directly with galleries and potential buyers. 
"Why do I need to sell to the co-op when I can get a better deal from the south?" asks Bart Hanna, a Inuk sculptor from Igloolik in Canada's Northwest Territories. 

   Some see so much commercial exploitation that the purity of the art form has been tarnished. 
Still others decry the growing layers of bureaucracy. 
Says Alma Houston, who helped start Cape Dorset -- one of the first co-ops -- on Canada's Baffin Island in 1961: "Some of them have gotten too pedestrian, they lack imagination." 
If the co-ops are going to successfully fend off competitors, the artists will have to once again be involved in the co-op and new marketing ideas will have to be found. 
If the co-ops want to continue as leaders in promoting and selling Inuit art, she says, "they will have to smarten up." 

   Still, "without the co-ops, Inuit art wouldn't be as well-known as it is today," says Gunther Abrahamson in Ottawa, a retired government official who helped develop the first Arctic co-ops. 

   Nor, possibly, would there be thriving art industries in other native American cultures. 
Today, cooperative businesses owned and operated by artists are playing a pivotal role in marketing the art of tribal artists all across North America. 

   "Cooperatives not only have facilitated the sale of works of art by native Americans, they also have created a forum where the traditions and styles of native American art can be handed down from generation to generation," says Halsey North, a New York art-group consultant. 

   In Cherokee, N.C., for example, Qualla Arts &amp; Crafts Mutual Inc., sells the work of nearly 300 Eastern Cherokee artists and craftsmen through a retail store and a mail-order catalog. 
And in addition to buying $15,000 to $20,000 of work from many artists, it also mails to each artist two dividend checks each year, amounting to about 5% of their total sales. 

   Qualla, which began operating in 1946, earns most of its revenue from its store in Cherokee, selling items like arrowhead ash trays that cost $4 and sculpture priced at $900. 
The items are also marketed through a mail-order catalog: 30,000 or so were mailed in the past three years. 
In addition, the co-op sells the art work at state fairs and exhibitions and represents artists in dealing with commercial buyers. 
For the Cherokee, most of whom prefer a rural, isolated existence, "the art couldn't have been sold without the co-op," George Holt of the North Carolina Arts Council says. 

   In Alaska, artists' co-ops have successfully bridged the problem of distance and fragmented markets, adds Jean Flanagan Carlo of the Institute of Alaska Native Arts, Fairbanks, Alaska. 
Two or three times a year, the co-ops sweep through the state providing raw materials, such as stone and fabric, and buying work to sell to buyers in the cities. 
Says Ms. Carlo, "None of the artists have the resources to do this on their own." 
Nowhere did artists need co-ops more than in the Arctic. 
The Inuit live in scattered settlements, days of travel away from each other and far from their markets. 
And in the early days, there was no market to speak of. 
Says Mr. Tookoome: "I had to sell to anyone and take any price they would give me." 

   The promotion of Inuit handicrafts began when the Canadian Handicrafts Guild sent Ms. Houston, a teacher, and her husband, Jim Houston, an art collector, to the north to encourage development of local industries among the Eskimos. 
The two established Cape Dorset's co-op with the help of the government and local Inuit artists. 

   Among the first accomplishments of co-ops like Cape Dorset was to develop a system for producing and selling art. 
Traditionally, each artist would sail up to the quarries and bring back, at most, two or three stones for carving. 
If the weather was bad or the rivers froze, they wouldn't travel at all. 
To remedy the problem, the co-op rented large 40-foot boats and brought back enough stones for a season. 
As for buying work, the co-ops were open year-round, a sharp contrast to the days when a potential buyer would appear maybe once a year. 
"We created a stable market," says Ms. Houston. 

   By the mid 1960s, the 30-or-so Arctic co-ops asked the Canadian government for help in organizing a central marketing system. 
In response, the government established Canadian Arctic Producers and financed its early operations. 
But it wasn't until the 1970s that the marketing group began to have an impact. 
By that time, notes Bill Lyall, a senior marketing official, "we had established a regular channel of distribution and a group of dealers aggressively promoting Inuit art." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
