ID: 169	RANK: 68	SCORE: 9.724923
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870602-0119 </DOCNO>
<HL> Canada Plans
Defense Boost
For the Arctic
---
It Seeks to Counter Threat
From Soviets, Make U.S.
Recognize Sovereignty
---
By John Urquhart
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CANDA
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<DATELINE> OTTAWA  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Canada will soon announce an ambitious Arctic military strategy to counter Soviet threats and deal with a sovereignty challenge from its closest ally, the U.S. 

   The new policy will be a costly departure from the practice of relying on part-time Eskimo soldiers, armed with World War II-vintage rifles, to patrol much of Canada's vast northern region. 

   The Arctic defense plan is expected to be a central part of a defense-policy document to be announced Friday by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's Conservative government. 
The document is expected to call for the purchase of a fleet of nuclear-powered submarines capable of operating under the Arctic ice. 
The attack submarines would also defend allied ships off the east and west coasts. 

   The Arctic has become a major concern since the U.S. Coast Guard icebreaker Polar Sea made an "unauthorized" voyage through the Arctic waters in 1985. 
External Affairs Minister Joe Clark said the event "brought home to all of us in a shocking way the reality that we can't assert our dominion there with words alone." 
Washington has so far refused to recognize Canada's claims to jurisdiction over the Arctic waters, although it does recognize Canadian sovereignty over the islands. 

   The U.S. argues the Arctic waters are international, and deploys submarines in the area. 
Canada claims the U.S. view is shortsighted because, if the waters were international, the Soviet Union would also be free to patrol them. 
"This is one of the great ironies" of the issue, Prime Minister Mulroney recently told reporters. 
Asked if he had said the same thing to President Reagan, he replied, "Have I ever." 

   Mr. Reagan says the U.S. is trying to find a way to recognize Canada's claims without setting a precedent that could hamper U.S. fleet movements elsewhere in the world. 
If the U.S. were to accept the claims, Canadian officials indicate, Canada wouldn't raise any obstacles to U.S. patrols in the Arctic, provided they respected Canadian laws. 

   Michael MccGwire, senior fellow of the Washington-based Brookings Institution, says Washington could resolve the dispute without setting a troublesome precedent. 
As other waterways in the world aren't icebound like those in the Arctic, he says, Washington could declare the situation unique and work out an access agreement with Canada. 

   U.S. government sources indicate Washington is thinking of just such an approach. 
Some military analysts predict the two countries will soon settle their maritime differences and cooperate just as closely on naval matters as they already do in northern air defense. 

   Canada also has other plans to strengthen its Arctic defenses, including the upgrading of five far-northern airfields to enable them to be used by U.S. and Canadian fighter interceptors. 
The two countries also are sharing the cost of modernizing a network of radar stations that stretch across Alaska and northern Canada. 

   Ottawa plans to order from a Canadian shipyard what is expected to be the world's largest icebreaker at a cost of 320 million Canadian dollars ($240 million). 
Plans to fit it for -- but not with -- a gun mount for patrols in the Arctic prompted a Conservative member of Parliament, Bob Hicks, to describe it as the "world's most expensive flagpole." 

   In peacetime, Canadian defense officials say, the proposed nuclear submarines would use sonar equipment to deliver "shots across the bow" of intruders. 
In wartime, they would hunt hostile submarines in the Arctic and off Canada's east and west coasts. 

   Assistant Deputy Defense Minister Robert Fowler says Soviet submarines could be used to launch cruise missiles against North American targets from southern areas of the Canadian Arctic. 
In addition, Soviet subs could operate in the Arctic Ocean near Canadian waters to intercept any allied submarines. 

   Defense officials say the proposed Canadian fleet would involve eight to 12 submarines. 
While they would be nuclear-powered, they wouldn't be nuclear-armed. 
Only three Western countries currently have nuclear-powered subs: the U.S., Britain and France. 
The Canadian subs are expected to be purchased from Britain or France. 
Some unofficial estimates put the cost as high as 10 billion dollars -- a price tag that bothers some members of Mr. Mulroney's own government. 

   The Canadian Center for Arms Control and Disarmament, a government-supported advisory agency, says sinking "scarce" defense dollars into a nuclear-submarine fleet is "an indulgence this country can't afford." 
And the U.S. and Canada's other allies have expressed strong reservations about the plan on the grounds the money could better be spent elsewhere. 

   Barney Danson, defense minister in the former government of Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, says the main Soviet threat from the north is from the air, not the sea. 
He says he sees little justification for diverting limited defense funds to nuclear submarines. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
