ID: 169	RANK: 77	SCORE: 9.510381
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870713-0106 </DOCNO>
<HL> Oil Rights at Alaskan Refuge Auctioned
Despite Environmental, Other Oppositions
---
By Robert E. Taylor
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
PETROLEUM (PET)
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In a setting reminiscent of a professional football draft, a host of Alaskan native corporations and their oil-industry partners carved up part of the most promising unexplored oil field in North America. 

   The Interior Department, defying opposition from leading lawmakers, environmental groups and the state of Alaska, last week conditionally auctioned off rights to oil under the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to Alaskan native corporations. 

   This "mega-trade" is conditioned on final review by the native groups within 10 days, and approval by Congress. 
Preparations for the deal have been conducted in secret for about a year by native corporations, the department and oil companies. 
Last week's sessions in an Arlington, Va., hotel were unannounced; a reporter was turned away Friday from the second of two days of land selection by the native groups. 

   In the 1970s, the federal government formed the native corporations to hold lands deeded by the government to Eskimos and Indians to settle their claims. 

   Instead of bidding cash in this auction, the native groups offered huge tracts from wildlife refuges elsewhere in the state. 
The Interior Department's Fish and Wildlife Service says it wants to obtain these native lands in order to consolidate control over certain refuges. 
In return, the natives stand to obtain commercially valuable lands that oil companies already have agreed to lease from them. 

   Critics call the trade either a giveaway of valuable public resources or a way to increase pressure on Congress to permit oil development on 1.5 million acres of the refuge in northeastern Alaska. 
George Miller, chairman of the House Water and Power Subcommittee, has termed it "a subterfuge to provide access to these lands to the oil companies." 

   But William Horn, assistant secretary of the interior for fish, wildlife and parks, defended the arrangement as "an unequaled opportunity to add some very important land to the wildlife ecosystem." 
He said his agency expects to obtain about 900,000 acres of prime wildlife habitat in exchange for a fraction of that acreage on the coastal plain. 

   If commercially recoverable oil deposits are found, the Interior Department estimates the entire plain would yield 3.2 billion barrels, and possibly more than the giant Prudhoe Bay oil field, 100 miles to the west. 

   Other participants say the wildlife lands include large portions of bear habitat on Kodiak Island, salmon rivers on the Kenai Peninsula, waterfowl wetlands in western Alaska and seabird nesting areas in the Aleutian Islands. 

   Mr. Horn declined to say how much land the native groups selected in return, but the figure of 33,000 acres has been discussed in congressional hearings. 
He said he planned to disclose the general results to some members of Congress in a few weeks, then send lawmakers a detailed environmental-impact statement early next year. 

   The sessions came shortly before a hearing in federal court in Anchorage this Friday on a court challenge to the auction by a host of environmental groups demanding a formal impact assessment before the land selections. 
For varying reasons, the deal also is opposed by Democratic leaders in both houses of Congress. 

   The state of Alaska withdrew from the land exchanges and opposes them. 
Gov. Steve Cowper said the state and federal governments lack enough understanding of the area's geology "to assure that either the state will obtain desirable lands or that highly prospective tracts are not traded away without sufficient compensation." 

   British Petroleum Co., its Standard Oil Co. unit, and Chevron Corp. are the only concerns to have data from a 1984 exploratory well on the plain. 
They leased tracts from the native Arctic Slope Regional Corp. and Kaktovik Inupiat Corp. after those groups acquired rights to about 92,000 acres in a prior land selection and exchange. 

   Last week's auction is believed to have involved at least four regional native corporations and a host of smaller village corporations. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
