ID: 169	RANK: 97	SCORE: 8.750257
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870325-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> Supreme Court Throws Out Injunction
On Exploring for Oil Off Alaska's Coast
---
By Stephen Wermiel
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PETROLEUM (PET)
NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)
SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Supreme Court, handing a defeat to environmental groups, threw out an injunction that has held up further exploration for oil and gas off the coast of Alaska. 

   The justices rejected a federal appeals court's ruling that a request for a court order to stop an environmental risk should get special treatment because it involves "unusual circumstances." 

   By a 7-2 vote, the high court said injunctions shouldn't be issued more readily in cases involving environmental risks than in other situations, unless Congress requires a different standard. 

   The justices were unanimous in saying that a 1980 federal law aimed at protecting Eskimo hunting and fishing rights doesn't apply to federal waters on the Outer Continental Shelf. 
Because the 1980 law doesn't apply to offshore drilling, it can't be cited as requiring that an injunction be issued under an easier legal standard, the high court said. 

   The ruling is a significant defeat for the strategy of environmental groups and a victory for energy-development companies. 

   The federal appeals court in San Francisco has applied its easier standard for injunctions "in a broad range of energy-development cases in the West," said Edward Bruce, a Washington lawyer. 
Mr. Bruce, who represented major oil companies that appealed the injunction against offshore exploration to the Supreme Court, said some coal exploration has been blocked, along with oil and gas leasing, in the nine western states covered by the San Francisco court. 

   Environmentalists, saying they want to study the opinion, nevertheless said its effect may be limited to the standard for injunctions under the 1980 law. 
They may still argue that environmental risks covered by other laws merit an easier standard for injunctions. 

   The ruling, written by Justice Byron White, is the latest development in a hotly contested dispute pitting western Alaskan Eskimos, who want to protect their hunting and fishing rights, against the Interior Department, which wants to accelerate the leasing of offshore areas near Alaska for oil and gas exploration. 

   Two lease sales that were the focus of lawsuits by the Eskimo villages of Gambell and Stebbins have been completed. 
Some exploratory drilling took place in Norton Sound and Navarin Basin, both part of the Bering Sea, but the drilling stopped when the appeals court issued its injunction in October 1985. 
None of the exploratory wells was reported to have found oil, and oil companies' interest in further exploration is unknown. 

   A lease sale involving Alaska's Bristol Bay has been delayed, pending the outcome of the Supreme Court case. 
The Interior Department received bids in January 1986 but hasn't opened them. 

   In yesterday's ruling, Justice White said that federal courts must weigh "competing public interests," in this case the "subsistence" needs of the Eskimos vs. energy development. 

   Justices John Stevens and Antonin Scalia wrote a brief separate opinion saying that once the court decided that the 1980 law doesn't apply to offshore drilling, there was no need to decide the standard for an injunction. 

   The ruling means the 1980 law didn't give the Eskimos any absolute hunting and fishing rights for the Outer Continental Shelf. 
But the high court yesterday also ordered the appeals court in San Francisco to reconsider a related question previously decided. 
That question is whether an earlier federal law, passed in 1971, wiped out inherent or native hunting and fishing rights the Eskimos may have offshore. 

   The appeals court could change its mind on this question and issue a new injunction, but lawyers familiar with the case said the chances of that are remote. 

   Environmental Permits
   The justices, by a 5-4 vote, said states may in some instances regulate mining and other activities on federal land that affect the environment. 

   The justices upheld California's system of requiring coastal development permits for mining on federal Forest Service lands. 
The court, in an opinion written by Justice Sandra O'Connor, said that neither federal mining and coastal management laws nor Forest Service regulations preempt the California requirement. 

   A federal appeals court in San Francisco had ruled that California couldn't require Granite Rock Co. to obtain a permit for limestone mining in Los Padres National Forest, near the natural attraction Big Sur. 

   Justices White, Stevens, Scalia and Lewis Powell dissented. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
