ID: 265	RANK: 54	SCORE: 13.390052
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870302-0128 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
Making News With History
---
By George V. Higgins</HL>
<DD> 03/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   ABC's "Our World" airs from 8 until 9 on Thursday nights. 
It is an inexpensive network throwaway entry up against NBC's "Cosby Show" and "Family Ties," each of which could be exploded tomorrow afternoon without the slightest diminution of the store of human wisdom (CBS features something called "Wizard" that I have never seen.) 

   The theory plainly is that Linda Ellerbee and Ray Gandolf are not destined to dominate any time period, and therefore are expendable in one ill-suited to their ambitions. 
Two facts are salient here: "Our World" is a show for thinking adults; very few adults capable of intellection watch the devil box at 8 p.m. Thinking adults eat dinner at 8 p.m. and keep the box dark. 
That is why Mr. Cosby's treacle is so popular, and why the insufferable Michael J. Fox's vehicle monopolizes audiences in that period. 

   ABC's scheduling of "Our World" amounts to an implied declaration that the network is marking time with the program until some bubble-gum replacement can be found. 
That is the unfortunate variety of self-fulfilling prophecy that's made VCRs so popular. 

   Mr. Gandolf and Ms. Ellerbee are engaged in serious business and deserve a decent shot at attracting their audience (the very sort of decent shot that NBC denied Roger Mudd and Connie Chung in their short-lived magazine show). 
Sunday nights at 7 would be an attractive slot. 
Both ABC and NBC expect to take a hosing from CBS's "60 Minutes," so why not see if the opposition can take a punch? 

   The punch of "Our World" gets its jolt from the presumption that it's possible and useful and even necessary to expose viewers to history. 
That is something of a departure for network television, which relentlessly and unthinkingly proceeds upon the notion that what's happened most recently -- and most photogenically -- is perforce most important. 

   Ms. Ellerbee and Mr. Gandolf choose an event or a phenomenon from a fairly distant year and endeavor to place it in the context of current consciousness. 
This is a rather tricky business, as one might imagine, much like the feats accomplished by the animal trainers at the circus or those of the motorists traveling at 200 mph in the Darlington 500. 
But in its quiet way, it's thrilling for that reason. 
It's also enjoyable to watch professionals testing their limits, even when they fail. 
The "Our World" I studied for this disquisition was broadcast a week ago Thursday. 
The year chosen was 1939, when Mr. Gandolf was nine and Ms. Ellerbee was five years away from being born. 
The hypothesis (which in my estimation did not work) was that America went cuckoo over David O. Selznick's elaborately choreographed pre-production machinations for "Gone With the Wind" because the republic was fearful of involvement in another European war. 

   The program opened with footage of Hitler's legions bombing the daylights out of Poland. 
Soon after, Olivia de Havilland delivered her considered judgment that Leslie Howard (who played Ashley) was distracted throughout filming because he saw Margaret Mitchell's story of the South losing the Civil War as an omen that England would lose World War II to Germany. 

   This is called pushing it. 
I doubt very much that the Photoplay readers who contributed to the composite depiction of the ideal Scarlet O'Hara frankly gave a damn about the Posnan Corridor. 
What I do not doubt is a single syllable of the recollections voiced by Ms. de Havilland (Melanie), Kay Brown (story editor), and Marcella Rabwin, executive assistant to the redoubtable Mr. Selznick. 
Ms. Rabwin was especially forthright, describing how Mr. Selznick discovered benzedrine decades before anyone else knew a darned thing about amphetamines, and kept running at full bore into dawn's early light while all about him dozed ("The most difficult man I ever worked for"). 

   There was memorable footage of the actresses who competed with Vivien Leigh to play Scarlet (two or three of them quite dreadful). 
There was Ms. Rabwin's disclosure that Ms. Leigh hated kissing Clark Gable -- he wore false teeth -- and the two of them were generally quite incompatible. 

   "Complete chaos," she called the filming: "Nobody liked anybody else on the picture." 
Butterfly McQueen, who played Prissy (who knew "nothin' 'bout birthin' babies") expressed her resentment that the blacks in the movie were treated as comic relief, and the whole shooting match was great gossip. 

   I think that's what most entertainment is. 
Ms. Ellerbee, Mr. Gandolf and their collaborating writer, Ann Derry, assembled a lot of clips and interviews about a milestone film in a milestone year, and I enjoyed watching it. 

   ---
   Owning no stock in any company manufacturing condoms, I must say that the companies and the Surgeon General have raised serious questions in my mind as to why on earth such any fabricator would wish to have the networks relax their prohibitions on advertisement of the devices. 
Day after day the matter is belabored in the newspapers, night after night on the devil box, and all of it for free. 
Commercials cost money. 
News does not. 
Is somebody funning with us here? 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
