ID: 265	RANK: 91	SCORE: 9.495481
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870126-0042 </DOCNO>
<HL> Reserve #?*! for Special Occasions
---
By Herbert l. Kahn</HL>
<DD> 01/26/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Now that financial inflation has been brought under some control, it might be time to pay attention to a similar phenomenon: swearword inflation. 
Just as a dollar today isn't worth anywhere near what it was in 1939, neither is a swearword. 
Acceptability has devalued it. 

   One important milestone on the road to acceptance of swearwords was reached when the publishers of the 1969 American Heritage Dictionary took what was then regarded as a bold step forward. 
They included in their book the definitions of some short, direct words, associated mainly with digestion and procreation, whose existence had not previously received official recognition. 

   Other steps have followed. 
Very recently, after an orientation course for new congressmen at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, one distinguished academic publicly criticized a prominent attendee for inattention, arrogance and generally behaving like a horse's hip -- though hip wasn't exactly the word he used. 

   One trouble with the new frankness is lack of elegance. 
When a professor from a leading institution berates a U.S. congressman, one might wish for more interesting and specific language. 
More important, however, swearword inflation robs us of a needed weapon exactly when we need it most. 
Consider: If it is permissible and customary to waste coarse language on minor discomforts or even ordinary conversation, then when truly powerful swearwords are required -- say, when you're driving through rural Maine at night during a blizzard and get your second flat tire -- there's nothing extra available; the cupboard is bare. 

   There is, however, hope that this problem, like many others that have appeared intractable, will be solved. 
One reason for hope is that fashions in language swing wildly back and forth; today's freedom was preceded by a level of repression that seems to us now to have been ridiculous. 

   Moreover, the repression, while severe everywhere, was unevenly distributed. 
Novels and stage plays enjoyed at least a little freedom but when they were translated to the movie screen, some ingenious contortions were required. 
The nature and effects of these contortions are interesting, because they give some clues as to how much virile language ought to be accepted in public life. 
Some examples: 

   In William Inge's 1953 play, "Picnic," two girls pick up a handsome drifter by pulling up in a convertible and telling him, "Get in, stud." 
In the 1956 movie, however, "stud" was a no-no; the girls had to say: "Get in, beefcake." 
A silly requirement, surely, but it didn't hurt the film much, if at all. 

   In the 1943 Broadway musical "Carmen Jones," the boxer sang: "Until you hear the bell, that final bell, stand up and fight, like hell!" 
The movie censors wouldn't allow the naming of what was then called "the Other Place," so in the 1954 film, the boxer had to sing, "Stand up and fight, fight well!" 
A draw: One uninformative phrase is substituted for another. 

   In some cases, however, it is absolutely essential to use the exact word. 
In the famous final scene of the 1939 film "Gone With the Wind," Rhett Butler, free at last from Scarlett's spell after being led around by the nose for three hours and 40 minutes, responds to her ultimate tirade with a sad, debonair: "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn." 
Even today, audiences greet the line with cheers and applause. 

   Here, no substitutions would have done. 
Imagine Rhett saying: "Frankly, my dear, I couldn't care less" or "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a darn." 
The scene would have dropped dead. 
The producers therefore decided to fight the censors and, fortunately, they won. 

   In some instances, on the other hand, substitutions are not only acceptable, but actually better than the real thing. 
W.C. Fields, by all reports an eager and inventive cusser, had to find a substitute for the common but outlawed phrase that requests the Deity to consign something to perdition. 
In moments of great stress, therefore, Fields made do by snarling: "Godfrey Daniels!" 
Try it. 
It's very satisfying. 

   Clearly, there's no need to go back to the silly old days, but it would be good if substitutions, and restrained language in general, come back into fashion. 
To conserve the really great swearwords for the truly significant occasions, we must in ordinary conversation call a spade a spade -- not a bloody shovel. 

   ---
   Mr. Kahn is an independent marketing consultant in Weston, Mass. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
