ID: 272	RANK: 35	SCORE: 6.639599
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871020-0120 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
326 Innocents Abroad
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 10/20/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   If you want to know why so many well-meaning Americans come a cropper in the Third World, no matter what their missions -- economic, religious, political, military -- Maria Thomas's fiction is a good place to get a feel for the problem. 
"Come to Africa and Save Your Marriage and Other Stories" (Soho, 235 pages, $14.95) follows on Ms. Thomas's first novel, "Antonia Saw the Oryx First," which made its mark earlier this year. 
Her titles are arresting, ironic billboards for her ironic and arresting "takes" on outsiders' trying and usually failing to fit into the seedy, corrupt, uncomfortable and often frightening jumble of Africa today. 

   Ms. Thomas is herself an American expatriate who has lived in Africa with her husband, an agricultural economist, since 1971. 
They arrived as Peace Corps volunteers and stayed on, at various postings -- Ethiopia, East Africa. 
Currently, they live in Liberia. 
A hundred years from now, perhaps sooner, literary historians will probably contrast Ms. Thomas's romantic disillusionment with Hemingway's confidence as a white American on safari in the green hills of Africa. 
But then Hemingway wanted Africa only as a shooting stage for short stints of displaying manhood at high intensity. 
Ms. Thomas has lived full-time in Africa for almost 20 years, hoping to fit in, doing without. 

   Much of the mood and the material of these 14 stories seems drawn right out of Ms. Thomas's own life. 
In interviews she certainly makes it seem as though she is using fiction to bring the news about her generation of Americans in Africa. 
And her jacket photo (by Sydney R. Goldstein) does capture, almost eerily, a woman who came of age in the '60s and kept the faith, insulated in Africa from changes in style and mentality at home, but shaken and also hardened. 
She has long unstyled hair, ethnic beads and a plain dark sweater that looks home made. 
Her face is what a college friend of mine would have called full of character. 
Back then he said he was looking for a wife with a face like that. 
I wonder what he would say if he could see this picture. 

   Like Ms. Thomas's stories, her picture makes me feel soft and untested. 
Here is an idealist and a sufferer who has known drought and squalor and the frustration of getting nowhere -- while the rest of us joined the "me" generation. 

   She is also some fine writer, not that she often commits the sin of "fine writing." 
No, this woman can gun the prose at you with all the sentiment ripped off but the feeling still there. 
Take this little snip of Americans in Ethiopia in terrible heat vaccinating people "so they can starve to death in a year." 
"They blasted out of town over the mountains in a Land Rover stuffed with grass," she writes. 
"From the top they looked into a great gash, a shocking slate V in the earth where baboons sat on ledges, manes as large as lions', their shrill cries amplified in the cones. 
They pressed through a string of grim towns, vaccinating steadily in what looked like refugee camps along the road." 

   Many of the stories are told through the eyes of American women. 
Some of them are Conradian observers, surrogates for Ms. Thomas who venture among cash-rich Indian women trying to buy their way out of statelessness in East Africa or get stuck in a parched black community perched somewhere between tribal and urban despair. 
But these are not women's stories in the sense of feminist or gynecological. 
The sexual politics here are tougher and, as always with Ms. Thomas, about the clash of cultures and continents. 
An overachieving black female student brushes with polygamy, then cuts and runs. 
This is high comedy, Waugh rewired for the '80s. 

   Completely different is the chilling little story of the foreign service secretary who marries the Ethiopian aristocrat and later leaves him to a certain death in the bloodbath of the revolution. 
She is still an outsider even in this marriage, which is what her husband knew all along and why he married her. 
She could get his children out of the country. 

   The special status of white people in Africa is the connecting theme of most of the stories. 
In "She Hears, Falling, the Seed," a white home is robbed by blacks. 
The outcome is more satisfactory, from the point of view of law and order, than it would have been in a burglary in New York, but the precarious isolation of the narrator-wife and her husband is what matters more than the robbery. 
Ms. Thomas is too sophisticated to make a moral out of this, but her story does cast a dark shadow on the future of whites in Africa. 

   Some of these stories have been published before in little magazines, and they are uneven enough that one supposes they were written over much time. 
From one to the next, you can feel Ms. Thomas trying out various moves and manners. 
The first few stories strike me as the most successful, the most intensely and freely imagined, the least detached and journalistic. 
Too many of the stories, however, end with the main character flying out of Africa. 
One of the best, "A Thief in My House," is only nominally an African story. 
The sleazy female narrator might as well be falling apart at the seams back in Oklahoma. 

   And what about Maria Thomas? 
She says she is not going to flee Africa unless she's forced to. 
So no doubt she is feeling as deracinated as usual in Liberia and, one hopes, working very hard on her next book. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
