ID: 272	RANK: 54	SCORE: 6.233259
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880209-0091 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: The Narcissistic Genius </HL>
<AUTHOR> Richard Locke </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   He was 6 foot 3, with long, wavy, dark brown hair and a "colorless, moonlike face with . . . heavy eyes and thick lips," "a face like a rich yet ungainly fruit." 
He had china blue eyes, and a leisurely mezzo voice, but protrusive, discolored teeth and a "mouth like a shark's in formlessness and appetite." 
He was large and flabby, "a great white caterpillar," with an offensively effeminate "swinging walk." 
He wore mauve gloves and a green carnation in his buttonhole, or a 17th-century prince's costume complete with plum-colored breeches and silk stockings, or a coat in the shape of a cello. 
He threw lilies at Lillie Langtry and Sarah Bernhardt, and was famous as an Oxford undergraduate for the extravagant decoration of his rooms and his notorious remark -- the first of many to become legend -- "I find it harder and harder every day to live up to my blue china." 
"Somehow or other, I'll be famous," he announced at 20, "and if not famous, notorious." 

   Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde was born in Dublin in 1854 to a remarkably eccentric and highly visible literary and professional couple. 
His father, Sir William Robert Wilde, was a famous eye-and-ear surgeon and Irish folklorist who had three illegitimate children before marriage and figured later in a libel suit concerning his affair with a young patient. 
Oscar's mother, born Jane Elgee, called herself Speranza Francesca Wilde, claimed she was a descendent of Dante and had been an eagle in a previous incarnation. 
She was well-known as a self-dramatizing Irish poet, essayist and artsy hostess decked out in fabulous headdresses and jewelry, who loved "to make a sensation." 
In her 60s she intoned to a young man, "There is only one thing in the world worth living for, and that is sin." 

   At Oxford, a student of Ruskin and Pater, ostentatiously aesthetic and epigrammatic, Wilde was homosexually virgin. 
He contracted syphilis from a female prostitute in 1878, and the disease was to kill him 22 years later. 
He married a pretty, shy, intelligent, middle-class English girl named Constance Lloyd in 1884, who bore him two children in the next two years. 
It wasn't until he was 32 that Wilde -- notoriously effete, a delicious scandal in both England and America (where he'd gone on a famous lecture tour in 1882) -- actually had sex with a boy. 
With this act, the artist finally became a criminal, not merely an aesthetic poseur. 
The improvement in his work was spectacular. 

   Wilde had a taste for Oxford undergraduates and "blackmailing, extortionate, faithless" boy prostitutes, but he met the love of his life -- Lord Alfred Douglas -- shortly after Wilde's novel, "The Picture of Dorian Gray," was published to great outrage and acclaim in 1891. ("Praise makes me humble," he once said. 
"But when I am abused I know I have touched the stars." 
The predilection this implies proved fatal, of course.) 

   Douglas was poison, the perfect villain of the tale. 
The beautiful son of the rich, pugnacious Marquess of Queensberry (a "complex brute" who reformed boxing rules and was famous as an adulterer and violent atheist), "Bosie" was slight, pale, blond, charming, "totally spoiled, reckless, insolent, and, when thwarted, fiercely vindictive." 
In short, he was his father's son, as Wilde was his mother's. 
Their love affair and conspicuous consumption of boy prostitutes aroused Queensberry to a frenzy of narcissistic homophobia. 
In 1895 -- when Wilde was the toast of London with both "The Importance of Being Earnest" and "An Ideal Husband" smash hits of the West End stage -- Queensberry left a card at Wilde's club accusing him of being a "posing Somdomite." (Enraged aristocrats presumably can't bother to spell "sodomite" correctly, particularly when a "son" and "some" other low boys are involved.) 

   Patricidal Bosie egged Wilde on to a libel suit (memories of Wilde's father), but he was forced to drop it when Queensberry trotted out the sordid, damning evidence in court. 
Wilde refused to cut and run to Paris, so after two immensely well-publicized trials, he was convicted of sodomy, utterly ruined, jailed for two years at hard labor, bankrupted, divorced with no chance of ever seeing his two sons (whose surnames were changed to their mother's), and broken in health. 
For three years after his release he wandered through France and Italy, accompanied by Bosie from time to time, drinking, picking up boys, squandering the money his (very few) loyal friends could supply, and dying of tertiary syphilis in a squalid hotel room in Paris at the age of 46. 

   As Richard Ellmann writes in this splendid new biography (Knopf, 680 pages, $24.95), Wilde had gone from "scapegrace" to "scapegoat" of late Victorian England. 
For Mr. Ellmann, the celebrated biographer of Joyce, who spent the last 20 years of his life on this book (he died in May), Wilde has immense historical importance: More than a literary figure, he was "a moralist, in a school where Blake, Nietzsche, and even Freud were his fellows." 
Mr. Ellmann's interpretations of Wilde's essays, stories, poems, plays, letters and conversation -- filled with "pontifical impudence," much of it still astonishingly brilliant and unfailingly funny without being cruel -- enlarge this excellent book and go a long way toward confirming Wilde's cultural (if not exactly literary) importance as a quintessential modern type: the self-destructive, self-proclaimed narcissistic genius. 

   ---
   Mr. Locke teaches English and comparative literature at Columbia University. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
