ID: 272	RANK: 61	SCORE: 6.174469
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870713-0060 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Theater:
Shirley and Shakespeare
---
By Edwin Wilson</HL>
<DD> 07/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> STRATFORD-UPON-AVON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   James Shirley, a 17th-century British dramatist whom no one except English professors ever heard of, would continue to be unknown, and certainly unproduced, were it not for the policy of the Swan Theater, the new venture of the Royal Shakespeare Company here in Stratford. 
The theater, one of the most attractive to open in recent memory, is dedicated to presenting not only rarely produced Shakespearean plays, but plays in "Shakespeare's context," that is, works by his contemporaries as well as those who came before and after him. 

   The theater itself is an accident of English weather, of which this June, the rainiest on record, was an excellent example. 
Spectators at the Royal Ascot races sloshed through mud for four days and Wimbledon tennis began nearly two days late because of rain. 
On a typically wet English afternoon in 1982, Frederick R. Koch, an American philanthropist visiting Stratford, sought refuge from the weather in the RSC museum, where he saw a model of the Swan Theater developed by architect Michael Reardon. 
When he discovered that the theater had not been built due to a lack of funds, Mr. Koch quietly agreed to supply them. 
A 430-seat Jacobean-style playhouse, the Swan fills the gap between the large main theater and the 150-seat Other Place where small experimental productions are mounted. 

   Now in its second season, the theater is a resounding success. 
Three levels of galleries fronted by thin wooden rails encircle a large thrust stage in a space that is at once expansive and intimate. 
Both the ambiance and the acoustics are ideal for Elizabethan and Jacobean plays, as evidenced by the two productions I saw, one of which was James Shirley's "Hyde Park." 
From 1625 until 1642, when London theaters were closed by the Puritans, Shirley wrote two plays a year as a house playwright for a series of companies. 
"Hyde Park," a comedy of manners, first appeared in 1632. 
The plot involves three interlocking love stories. 
Trier (James Fleet) decides to test the love of Julietta (Felicity Dean) by turning her loose with the lecherous Lord Bonville (John Carlisle); if she withstands the latter's advances, Trier will marry her. 
Lacy (Richard McCabe) pursues Mistress Bonavent (Pippa Guard), whose husband disappeared seven years previously and who finally marries Lacy. 
Meanwhile, Julietta's brother, Fairfield (Alex Jennings), is in love with Mistress Carol (Fiona Shaw), an anti-romantic who spurns all advances from her many suitors. 

   At least two of the love stories end unconventionally. 
After Lacy has married Mistress Bonavent, her first husband turns up unexpectedly to reclaim her, and Julietta, rather than submitting to the lascivious Lord Bonville, converts him to virtue and agrees to marry him. 
The third couple, Fairfield and Carol, are in a line of witty lovers that runs through English drama -- from Beatrice and Benedick in "Much Ado About Nothing" to characters in the plays of George Bernard Shaw. 
In fact, Carol is a perfect Shavian heroine: an outspoken feminist who eschews love but eventually falls hardest of all. 

   It's a marvelous part and it is played to perfection by Ms. Shaw, whose timing and offhand delivery, added to her charm, make her an irresistible comedienne. 
In Mr. Jennings she has an expert partner for her ripostes. 
Director Barry Kyle has kept the text intact, but has costumed the characters in clothes of the Edwardian era, a transformation that works admirably. 

   Nothing could stand farther apart from "Hyde Park" than Shakespeare's first tragedy, "Titus Andronicus." 
Set in fourth-century Rome and filled with intrigue, murder, mutilation and unbridled bloodshed, it is the prototypical revenge play that appealed to the Elizabethans in the way that gross horror films appeal to today's teen-agers. 
For three acts, Titus, a Roman tribune, suffers every form of violence imaginable, including the beheading of two sons, the rape and mutilation of his daughter, and the cutting off of his own hand. 
Then comes the inevitable turning point when he vows revenge on those responsible for the villainy against him. 
In the final two acts he wreaks that revenge, bloodily and deliciously. 
Historically "Titus" is important as a forerunner of Shakespeare's later plays, particularly "Hamlet." 
Titus, for example feigns madness as part of his plot to avenge his family. 

   In this production, Brian Cox plays Titus as a blustery but knowing buffoon, an interpretation that works particularly well in the mad scenes. 
For her part, director Deborah Warner has met the problem of the play's bloody language and action head on and conquered it. 
The murders pile up in the final scene, but Ms. Warner and an accomplished cast manage to hold the audience, to grip and horrify it. 
And once again, the Swan Theater proves itself to be a most effective venue for drama written for a platform stage. 

   On the other hand, a much better play by Shakespeare, "The Merchant of Venice," fares far less well on the main stage. 
The villain of the piece is its director, Bill Alexander. 
Excessive is the word for his approach. 
Almost everything about the production is overdone, from the clouds of smoke billowing continuously across the stage to the ludicrous Italian-Yiddish accent of Shylock and his daughter Jessica. 
Shylock (Antony Sher) is out of control emotionally, and those who oppose him engage in the most obvious and intemperate kind of anti-Semitism. 

   I'm certain this production sets a record for the number of times Shylock is spat upon. 
Meanwhile, John Carlisle turns Antonio, the merchant Shylock asks for his pound of flesh, into a flaming homosexual. 
Deborah Findlay plays the wise and beautiful Portia as a music-hall hussy. 
The result of these unhappy innovations is to unbalance the play's perilous equilibrium between cold bigotry and warm lyricism. 

   "The Merchant of Venice" is a prime example of how not to do Shakespeare; Peter Hall's "Antony and Cleopatra" at the National Theater in London is just the opposite. 
Like Ms. Warner's "Titus," Mr. Hall's "Antony and Cleopatra" shows great respect for the text while at the same time infusing it with enormous energy and spirit. 
Judi Dench is a fiery Cleopatra and Anthony Hopkins a world-weary Antony who shows flashes of his former authority. 
Clearly these two lovers stand above those around them, but they are fatally flawed: Cleopatra by cowardice and selfishness, and Antony by his obsessive pursuit of sensuality. 
As directed by Mr. Hall the play has the sweep and grandeur Shakespeare intended, and it also shows us at every point the inexorable progress to downfall of two towering figures whom we can never fully forgive, but never cease to admire. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
