ID: 272	RANK: 75	SCORE: 6.088352
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880414-0012 </DOCNO>
<HL> Your Money Matters: Differences in Divorce Laws Prompting Some People to Shop for the Best State </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alexandra Peers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   People relocate for many reasons: A new job, a better climate, lower tax rates. 

   And divorce laws. 

   Such laws vary widely from state to state. 
The spouse who brings more assets into the marriage stands to fare better in some states than in others. 
The same is true for women with children and individuals whose spouses have substantial inherited property. 

   Consequently, many people involved in a divorce -- especially wealthy individuals -- are shopping around for the state likely to award the best settlement. 

   "These cases are all over the place," says Norman Sheresky, a New York lawyer whose firm is handling seven divorce actions that cross state lines. 

   "The question of whether my client is better off in California or New York" than in Florida arises all the time, says Melvyn Frumkes, a divorce lawyer in Miami. 

   But there are disadvantages to "migratory" divorces. 
Most states have residency requirements for divorce proceedings, so a spouse may have to relocate to use the strategy -- perhaps to the family's summer home. 
Also, establishing a state's jurisdiction can be a lengthy -- and costly -- process. 

   Gary Silverman, a Reno, Nev., divorce lawyer, says any economic justification for "migratory" divorce generally hinges on the willingness of both parties to limit their proceedings to one state -- out of either one party's ignorance of the potential disadvantages, or a mutual desire to resolve the matter quickly. 
If the couple doesn't agree on a state, "there's an incredible expense in fighting (over) jurisdiction," he says. 

   Still, other lawyers say that if there is enough money at stake, the financial incentives may outweigh the cost of fighting. 
Lynne Gold-Bikin, a divorce lawyer in Norristown, Pa., notes that a spouse who relocates stands to gain a share in a former partner's inherited property, proceeds from a lawsuit or business profits that otherwise might have been denied under the home state's laws. 

   An individual considering the migratory divorce strategy may have many states from which to choose. 
Fifteen states have either no residency requirement or one of less than 60 days, according to Family Law Quarterly. 
Twenty-two states require minimum residency of 60 days to six months. 
But a person filing for a divorce in a new state usually must sign a statement indicating that he or she intends to live there; failure to do so could lead to litigation to overturn the divorce. 

   California is one of the best states for people who haven't earned or accrued as much as their spouses, many lawyers say, because it has a broad concept of community property, often splitting assets acquired during marriage evenly between the two parties. 

   Texas may be a good state for women with children, Mr. Sheresky says, because divorce settlements there can be set by juries, which may be more susceptible than judges to emotional appeals. 
But childless wives may want to go elsewhere, he says, because Texas doesn't believe in alimony. 

   Connecticut considers inherited property, whether acquired before or during a marriage, to be marital property, subject to division at the time of divorce. 
New York doesn't. 
Thus a New York woman planning a divorce might find it worthwhile to establish residency in Connecticut if much of her husband's wealth was inherited. 
Connecticut does have a one-year residency requirement before a divorce can be granted, but newcomers can file immediately upon their arrival. 

   Last summer, one of Ms. Gold-Bikin's clients, a woman who had lived with her husband in Delaware, moved to Pennsylvania to file for divorce. 
Delaware limits alimony payments to two years for marriages of less than 20 years, says Ms. Gold-Bikin; the couple has been married only six years. 
The wife, who wants to work part time until her baby starts school, intends to petition a Pennsylvania court for six years of alimony payments. 

   Spouses who relocate can take advantage of life-style differences as well as disparate state laws. 
If a New York City husband moves to, say, Joplin, Mo., and files for divorce there, when the wife asks for support to cover her $2,500 monthly rent, "the judge is going to look at her like she's crazy," says Mr. Silverman. 

   But if each spouse files for divorce in separate states, the legal proceedings can be costly and time-consuming. 
Judges have considerable latitude to decide which state has jurisdiction, usually basing a decision on which petition was filed first, in which state the couple accumulated their assets, and which courts tend to move faster, lawyers say. 

   When courts in both states claim jurisdiction, "it's a race either to conclusion," to see which state settles the case first, or to see which spouse can get an injunction to halt proceedings in the other state -- although the other court may ignore it, says Ms. Gold-Bikin. 

   Jurisdictional battles can be "a trap for the unwary," says Homer Clark, professor of law at the University of Colorado. 
For example, if a wife decides to dispute her husband's right to file for divorce in his new state, "if she or a lawyer on her behalf participates in the suit, even to contest it," her doing so generally means that state then has jurisdiction. 
If the wife doesn't contest it, the court may rule it has jurisdiction anyway. 
In only a handful of states can a spouse appear to dispute jurisdiction without legitimizing the filing. 

   Even when one state grants a divorce, its property-distribution laws may not apply, adding to the time and cost of litigation. 
One famous case dragged on in the Pennsylvania and Florida courts for eight years. 
Esther Stambaugh filed for divorce in 1966 in Pennsylvania, where she and her husband, J.H. William Stambaugh, had lived for 31 years. 
Mr. Stambaugh then moved to Florida and filed for divorce there; a Florida circuit court dissolved the marriage but left the financial settlement to be determined elsewhere because the couple's principal assets were Pennsylvania real estate. 

   A Pennsylvania county court ordered Mr. Stambaugh to pay $375 a week in alimony. 
But in 1974, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Stambaugh didn't have to pay alimony because the couple was already divorced when the county court ordered him to do so. 
In its decision, the court said the state "makes no provision for requiring an ex-husband to support an ex-wife." 

   The Supreme Court has held that for a state to have jurisdiction over a couple's financial settlement, both the husband and wife should have had "sufficient contacts" with that state, Prof. Clark says. 
But, he adds, "what those contacts are" is subject to litigation in each case. 

   In general, though, as long as the spouse who filed for divorce is a bona fide resident of the state that grants the divorce, the state "where the marriage is dissolved is where the law (on financial settlement) applies," says Ms. Gold-Bikin. 

   Jurisdictional ploys, says Mr. Sheresky, "are as many and as good as the lawyers who come up with them and the judges who try to keep up with them." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
