ID: 272	RANK: 76	SCORE: 6.079150
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870528-0118 </DOCNO>
<HL> Last Few Skywriters
Strut the Write Stuff
Doing Ads on the Fly
---
Husband-Wife Team Peddles
Pepsi From Old Biplane;
Prison Greeting: 'Hi Dad'
---
By Frederick Rose
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> JACKSONVILLE, Fla.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A small, blond woman stands a smoking biplane on its wings, turning it sharply to fly down the vertical line of the letter P. 

   In a minute, the airplane dances through more turns to etch an E as hundreds of necks nearly two miles below crane skyward. 
Smoky letters soon spell PEPSI across 10 miles of sky over a Jacksonville country-music festival, and Suzanne Asbury-Oliver pilots her red, white and blue plane back to a nearby airport. 

   Skywriting once was commonplace. 
Suntan oil and television sets, candy bars and used cars were peddled from the air. 
Phillips Petroleum Co. painted 66 in white to sell its Phillips 66 gasoline. 
Pilots wrote LSMFT, standing for Lucky Strike Means Fine Tobacco. 
Some messages went beyond commercials to personals, including marriage proposals. 

   Then skywriting almost died. 
"It was done in by rival types of advertising," says Fred Danzig, the editor of Advertising Age, a trade publication. 
Many skywriters wrote their last messages in the 1950s, as corporate advertisers turned to television and billboards. 
These days there are blimps with flashing lights, planes that tow banners, and even squadrons of aircraft that puff smoke on computerized command, a technique called sky-typing. 
But classic skywriting is mostly a memory. 

   "People come up to us and tell us that it's been 30 years since they saw it," says the soft-spoken Ms. Asbury-Oliver, 28 years old. 

   She and her tall, jocular husband, Steven, 41, are among a handful of pilots who are still skywriting. 
One of their compatriots, Robert Favreau, 43, was killed just last month when his plane collided with another while descending to land at Orlando, Fla. 
Mr. Favreau, a member of Rosie O'Grady's Flying Circus, the skywriting arm of an Orlando shopping and entertainment complex, had just finished putting the smile on a happy face. 

   In carrying on the barnstorming tradition, the Asbury-Olivers live like gypsies eight months a year. 
From their base in Bartow, Fla., they tour the U.S. with little but their clothes, a few spare aircraft parts and a friendly female beagle, incongruously named Charlie Brown. 
They have braved tornado warnings in Oklahoma, oncoming jet fighters in Florida and engine failure in California, to write ads above nearly 150 cities and towns over the past year. 

   The Asbury-Olivers pilot a 58-year-old Travel Air biplane, which flew its first skywriting mission for Pepsi-Cola in 1938. 
The little plane was one of six used by the company before the eclipse of aerial advertising after World War II. 
In 1973, Pepsi acquired the Travel Air for $23,000 as a piece of corporate memorabilia and resumed skywriting. 
Another biplane was bought as a backup. 

   "This is the most singularly dollar-effective promotion we have," Alan Pottasch, a senior vice president of Pepsi-Cola USA, a PepsiCo Inc. unit, says of the $200,000-a-year skywriting campaign. 
"There's a tremendous interest in nostalgia." 

   Interest, perhaps, but not much income for the few free-lance skywriters still flying. 
"The jobs are scarce," says Charles Doyle, an Apple Valley, Minn., pilot, who says he hasn't increased his fee of $500 per skywriting flight in 25 years. 
Mr. Doyle, 71 years old, says that he keeps on skywriting "because it's almost a hobby and I enjoy it." 

   Writing in the air is an illusion. 
Although it looks as if skywriters fly up and down, they actually do their writing on the horizontal, flying an intricate series of lines and turns at the same altitude. 
The task is complicated by the fact that letters must be written in mirror image to be read from below. 
Skywriters usually chart their turns on paper beforehand to minimize the number of moves and the flying time. 

   Clouds and strong winds add to the difficulties. 
"You almost never have a perfect day," says Milo Tichack, an Oakland, Calif., skywriter. 

   Skywriting was invented by a British pilot during World War I and introduced to Americans in 1922, reportedly when a pilot emblazoned HELLO USA over New York City. 
"We did crazy things in those early years," says Anthony "Andy" Stinis, 78 years old, of Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 
He recalls putting up whiskey ads in the moonlight 50 years ago. 

   Things still get crazy, especially on skywriting jobs like marriage proposals. 
"The worst part is telling 100 callers named Sue that it wasn't their boyfriend who proposed marriage," says Mr. Stinis's son, Gregory, a skywriter in Long Beach, Calif. 
One of the odder assignments taken by Mr. Tichack was a Father's Day greeting: HI DAD over a California prison. 

   The techniques of skywriting were a well-kept secret in the early years. 
"You couldn't get anyone to tell you how they wrote and how they made the smoke," says William Barber, a champion air-show pilot and aviation historian. 
Though skywriters claimed to mix mysterious concoctions for smoke, they actually used a light oil, and they still do. 
The oil is vaporized -- not burned -- in the heat of the aircraft's exhaust and spewed out in an expanding plume of white smoke. 
It is considered environmentally safe. 

   Some aging skywriters pass the tricks of the trade on to proteges. 
John "Jack" Strayer skywrote for Pepsi for nearly a decade, decked out in a helmet, goggles and jodhpurs. 
He tutored Ms. Asbury-Oliver when he was in his 60s and she was only 21. 
She got off to a perilous start. 
"I had just written my first P and E when the engine quit," she says. 
But she managed to glide in for a perfect powerless landing, and soon was back up, practicing the intricate turns. 

   Ms. Asbury-Oliver taught the craft to her husband, who was an experienced pilot. 
For two flying seasons, they barnstormed the country by biplane. 
"There were the two of us, two suitcases, a tool box and the dog," she recalls. 
But now they travel more comfortably, with one piloting the plane between towns and the other driving a motor home. 

   The Asbury-Olivers spend much of their time keeping the old Travel Air in top condition. 
Parts are hard to come by. 
They once drove 100 miles in the middle of the night on the off-chance that a Texas farmer might have an old engine part they needed. 
Fortunately, he did. 

   It is the thrill of flying that drives the couple to such lengths. 
"Other kids worshiped basketball players, but I wanted to be an air-show pilot," says Mr. Asbury-Oliver, son of a Missouri farmer. 
His wife, a doctor's daughter from Oregon, started flying at the age of 14. 

   Most skywriting is done on weekends to coincide with local events -- fairs, races, and air shows -- that draw large crowds. 
Besides etching happy faces in the sky and publicizing events for Pepsi, the Asbury-Olivers occasionally take on outside jobs. 
The most bizarre was a 2,000-mile trip to write a coded love message over North Carolina. 

   Under ideal conditions, messages linger in the sky for a half-hour or longer. 
But usually the wind sweeps them quickly away. 
Skywriters must be brief if they are to finish the last letters before the first dissipate. 
Letters sometimes don't disappear quickly enough. 
Skilled though they are, the Asbury-Olivers make mile-high mistakes, including his announcement of a coming AIRSOW. 

   Some errors may be intentional, however, to get attention. 
Mr. Doyle, the Minnesota skywriter, says that he was instructed to misspell the president's name during the 1984 campaign. 
Newspapers across the country carried photos of his mistake: REGAN. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
