ID: 272	RANK: 9	SCORE: 8.072780
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880719-0122 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Lady of Letters </HL>
<AUTHOR> Donna Rifkind </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Edith Wharton wrote half a dozen letters on an ordinary day. 
Once, returning from a three-day journey, she found 65 letters awaiting her reply. 
Large households, publishers, editors, lawyers, an ailing estranged husband and a negligent lover: All demanded -- and received -- her epistolary attention. 
As her correspondence bears all the charming acuity of her best fiction, "The Letters of Edith Wharton" (Scribner's, 654 pages, $29.95) is a valuable literary chronicle. 

   The husband and wife team of R.W.B. Lewis and Nancy Lewis have chosen nearly 400 out of 4,000 existing letters. 
Among the more famous recipients were Wharton's friends Bernard Berenson and Kenneth Clark. 
Henry James burned most of what she wrote to him, but his presence shines throughout the volume in her loving descriptions of him to others. 
The newly discovered letters to her lover Morton Fullerton show Wharton alternating between pride and vulnerability, determination and whimpering confusion. 

   Edith Newbold Jones was born in 1862 into one of New York's old, influential families. 
After a childhood spent in New York, Newport, and rambling through Europe, she married Teddy Wharton in 1885. 
It was to prove an altogether unsatisfying union, for though Teddy gave the appearance of perfect respectability, he became increasingly unstable and difficult to live with. 
Edith was stifled by her responsibilities in running his elaborate household and serving as his nurse/companion. 
She found solace in constant travel, in the fiction she began producing regularly in 1898, and in her many friends. 

   Critics, especially the feminist variety, like to point out a favorite theme in Wharton's fiction: that of a heroine's severe limitations within a narrow social framework. 
But Wharton's own life, glimpsed through her letters, was remarkably free of limits. 
In spite of her wifely obligations (which ceased upon her official separation from Teddy in 1911, followed by divorce), her wealth and social standing allowed her to go where she pleased, read what she liked, and enjoy all she could absorb of a world that seemed to her to overflow with richness and beauty. 
"I think sometimes that it is almost a pity to enjoy Italy as much as I do," she wrote to a friend, "because the acuteness of my sensations makes them rather exhausting." 

   Wharton had a connoisseur's sensibility, which made her feel a special affinity for other connoisseurs. 
In her most vivid letters she invites her correspondents into a conspiracy of appreciation: To Bernard Berenson, she asserted, "I don't know anyone who would be so penetrated by the aching beauty of this place {Montredon, in France}." 

   She preferred people who combined, as she did, keen perception with an ability to savor "life in the round" -- for her, these qualities marked the top of the line, the connoisseur's choice. 
At the end of her life she wrote to Berenson, "How thankful I am to remember that, whether as to people or as to places &amp; occasions, I've always known the gods the moment I met them." 

   When people fell short of this ideal, Wharton retreated into her writing. 
She was extremely productive, publishing novels, stories, poems, an autobiography, essays, and, during World War I, journalism. 
Her energies were handsomely rewarded. 
During the years 1920 to 1924, her work brought in an estimated $250,000, approximately $3 million in today's currency. 
However, as her earning power increased, so did many critics' impatience with her efforts. 
The late fiction, until quite recently, generally has been all but dismissed. 
Her best and most endearing book is "The House of Mirth" (1905), a study of an opportunistic young American woman who tries to survive among a set of "irresponsible pleasure-seekers." 

   Wharton's disgust for the moral dissolution of Americans is echoed often in her letters. 
After her divorce and the sale of her estate in Lenox, Mass., she lived mainly in France, returning to the States only when necessary. 
She claimed, "My first few weeks in America are always miserable, because the tastes I am cursed with are all of a kind that cannot be gratified here." 

   Of course, as the Lewises astutely point out, Wharton was American to her bones, and "never more so than when giving vent to such utterances." 
While this kind of irritability appears often in the letters, its like is overpowered by Wharton's more frequent displays of her capacity to enjoy her life. 
There are many lovely descriptions of her travels in Italy, France, Morocco and Spain, and even her visits to the front lines during World War I to deliver medical supplies are flushed with the exuberance of adventure. 

   Wharton wrote in 1936, a year before she died: "I wish I knew what people meant when they say they find 'emptiness' in this wonderful adventure of living, which seems to me to pile up its glories like an horizon-wide sunset as the light declines. 
I'm afraid I'm an incorrigible life-lover &amp; life-wonderer &amp; adventurer." 

   Wharton's pointed appreciation of the privileges her life awarded her is the most salient aspect of her letters. 
The volume's other outstanding feature is the Lewises' editing. 
Their notes are marvelously thorough but never pedantic or intruding; they let Wharton speak for herself. 
The Lewises have produced a book that should stand as a model for others of its kind. 
Through their efforts, Edith Wharton's dedicated, intensely lived life is revealed in her letters to be a true "life in the round." 

   ---
   Miss Rifkind is assistant managing editor of The New Criterion. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
