ID: 195	RANK: 11	SCORE: 13.093623
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870702-0142 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film:
Laughs in Space From Brooks and Spielberg
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 07/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Mel Brooks's "Spaceballs" has the kind of icky adolescent humor you might expect from the man who staged the group flatulence scene in "Blazing Saddles" -- snot jokes, that sort of thing. 
And who, besides the manic Mr. Brooks, would imagine that outer space might as well be in the Catskills, that the "Star Wars" trilogy could be recast as one long Jewish joke? 

   But who else has made a career out of satirizing the various film genres: westerns ("Blazing Saddles"), horror ("Young Frankenstein"), suspense ("High Anxiety"), et cetera? 
Then again, "satire" doesn't really describe what Mr. Brooks does, the way he gobbles up the ingredients for each type of picture, then belches out his own vulgar -- and often hilarious -- version. 

   So, you might be wondering, is "Spaceballs" funny? (And, you might be wondering, why so many questions? 
But after sitting through a couple of hours of Brooks burlesque, it's hard not to fall into the Yiddishe habit of answering questions with questions, isn't it?) 

   "Spaceballs" is extremely funny -- buoyantly tasteless (Mr. Brooks has created a new standard for Jewish American Princess jokes) and also smart about the cynicism of the movie business. 
Long before the movie is finished we're hearing about "Spaceballs, the T-shirt," and "Spaceballs, the placemat." 
We aren't talking "Network" here, mind you, but a lighter, sillier, dopey summer picture kind of parody. 

   Like all the best Brooks movies, this one moves forward in fits and starts, and most of the starts are hyperkinetic. 
In some ways "Spaceballs" is like the enactment of a standup comedy routine; many of the best jokes are really commentaries on the jokes that preceded them. 

   The best part about a top-form Brooks movie -- which "Spaceballs" is -- is the way it rises to the weirdness of real life. 
At one point during "Spaceballs" the Darth Vader character -- here called Dark Helmet -- pops the videocassette of "Spaceballs" into his VCR so he can remember what's happened so far. 
The scene reminded me of a wedding I went to recently where, halfway through the party, people began clustering around a TV set where they could watch the first half of the wedding, the wedding they were still celebrating. 

   Mr. Brooks has some fun mimicking the "Star Wars" hardware (with an assist from George Lucas's Industrial Light &amp; Magic division) -- and its oddball cast of intergalactic characters. 
John Candy, who plays a half-man, half-dog space adventurer called "Barf," does an amusing update on the Cowardly Lion in "The Wizard of Oz." 
Most of the casting is terrific, especially Daphne Zuniga as the Druish princess and Rick Moranis as Dark Helmet; his rubbery comic's face works wonders. 
Mr. Brooks appears in two roles; the one you'll remember is Yogurt, the ancient seer who distributes his sagesse in fortune cookies. 

   Joan Rivers provides the voice of a robot lady-in-waiting. 
Her lines are disappointingly dull but there's great pleasure in hearing that voice come out of a shapely, skinny body that looks as though it's been dipped in gold lame from head to toe. 

   ---
   "Innerspace" is the most recent attraction in Steven Spielberg's movie amusement park and it does what it's meant to do. 
Almost before the ride begins you know where it's going to end, but there's enough ingenious hocus-pocus along the way to leave you feeling pleasantly lightheaded. 

   Having run out of variants on outer space and alien creatures, producer Spielberg and director Joe Dante ("Gremlins," "Explorers") decided to try a "Fantastic Voyage" update with state-of-the-art special effects. (You may remember "Fantastic Voyage," the camp '60s sci-fi trip inside a human body. 
The most effective special effect was Raquel Welch.) 

   Here, the story has to do with Silicon Valley espionage. 
One group of scientists has figured out how to "miniaturize" people and spaceships; another group wants to steal the formula. 
There's a bit of introductory huffing and puffing until the film makers manage to do what they want to do: shrink one of their heroes until he's almost molecular, and accidentally implant him into a man, not a laboratory rabbit. 
Because this kind of movie requires a ticking clock, the good guys have 24 hours to recover an "enlargement chip" or the fellow on the inside will die. 

   Dennis Quaid, who was so wonderful as Mercury astronaut Gordon Cooper in "The Right Stuff," is appealing as Tuck, a disillusioned flyboy. 
It is Tuck who volunteers for shrinkage, and who sails around someone else's innards in a fully equipped spacecraft. 

   He ends up inside Jack (Martin Short), a meek grocery clerk and hypochondriac. 
Mr. Short, known best for his work on SCTV Comedy Network and "Saturday Night Live," has a slightly unconscious gentility that can be very funny. 
After he grows used to the idea of Tuck whizzing around his circulatory system, he says dreamily: "You're seeing parts of my body I'll never get to see." 
You can tell this is a man who fantasizes about his blood-cell count. 

   But he likely wouldn't come up with the pulsating, throbbing world the film makers have concocted inside him. 
"Innerspace" is all gimmickry, but the gimmicks -- and the performers -- are inventive and amusing. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
