ID: 195	RANK: 26	SCORE: 10.989281
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870706-0009 </DOCNO>
<HL> Culture Shock:
Two Computer Firms
With Clashing Styles
Fight for Market Niche
---
Apollo Turns Traditional,
Sun Strives to Stay Brash
In Work-Station Battle
---
The Ferrari in the Pond
---
By William M. Bulkeley
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> APCI SUNW
COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The cover of High Technology magazine recently featured two of the world's hottest computer designers posed next to their latest creations. 
The computers looked similar, but not their makers. 

   Representing Apollo Computer Inc. of Chelmsford, Mass., was engineer David Nelson, coiffed and immaculately garbed in a gray suit and a silk tie. 
His rival from Sun Microsystems Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., was William Joy, pictured in a bulky sweater, with a fringe of beard and determinedly unkempt hair. 

   This is a story of how East Coast meets West Coast-head-on-in the bruising computer marketplace. 
Five years ago both Sun Microsystems and Apollo Computer were upstart, entrepreneurial firms, striving to make a mark in the horizonless computer business. 

   "It was like two rowboats in the Pacific Ocean," recalls Robert Smith, Sun's vice president and chief financial officer. 
"We never saw each other." 

   Today, they are competing chin to chin for sales in their significant niche, the $1.5 billion work-station business, and trying hard to keep at bay such big players as International Business Machines Corp., Digital Equipment Corp., Hewlett-Packard Inc. and Apple Computer Inc. 
Both companies say the deciding factor in the war -- as important as their products and prices -- could be their radically different corporate cultures. 

   To be sure, both companies are go-go computer companies, with fanatical, bearded engineers and executives who glide to work in candy-colored Ferraris. 

   But Apollo, situated near Massachusetts' famed Route 128, is turning into a buttoned-down, traditional company, eager to overcome a few missteps of its more flamboyant early days. 
Sun, nestled in the middle of California's Silicon Valley, is ebullient and, at times, downright loony. 
The company throws monthly beer bashes, and on Halloween employees report to work in gorilla suits. 

   It is a fight between a company trying to grow up and one that remains intentionally brash and ruthless. 
The companies' personalities are reflected in their products, their marketing strategies -- and the occasional cheap shot fired from the chief executive officer's desk. 

   "In this country, everything loose rolls to the West Coast," says Apollo's chairman, 53-year-old Thomas A. Vanderslice. 

   Those are fighting words to Scott McNealy, Sun's extroverted, 32-year-old president, who points out that his company surpassed Apollo in sales in the quarter ended March 31, 1987. 
"If I'd set a goal of beating Apollo," says the hyperactive Mr. McNealy, who carries a cellular phone on the golf course, "I'd already be done." 

   A work station is a powerful personal computer used by engineers, scientists, printers and money managers to do such tasks as product design and investment planning. 
Its graphics are precise -- a screen can contain more than one million dots of light -- and it can accomplish dozens of tasks at once. 
Work stations, which retail for $5,000 to $80,000, can also be linked together in a network. 

   Business is booming. 
Last year, the work-station market grew 65% to $1.5 billion, according to Dataquest Inc., a market-research company. 
Growth could reach 50% again this year. 
Apollo had a 26% share of the market in 1986, compared with Sun's 23%. 

   But Sun is growing considerably faster and is more profitable. 
In the quarter ended March 31, Sun's sales grew 146% to $141 million. 
That topped Apollo's $123.4 million, a 50% increase from the year-earlier period. 
Sun earned $10.2 million, compared with Apollo's $6.4 million. 
In addition, Sun sells more units than Apollo, at a lower cost per unit. 

   To understand the current state of the battle, it is important to know the brief but turbulent history of the business and the two different paths that the once-similar companies have chosen. 

   Apollo invented the work station. 
The company was founded in 1980 by a prominent electronics engineer, J. William Poduska, who had a track record of successful designs for minicomputers. 
Thanks to his reputation, the company had no trouble raising capital; his connections in the business gave Apollo an early boost in the marketing of its products. 
In 1981 it released its first work station, the DN 100, which sold for $45,000. 

   In 1984, the rapidly expanding company hired Mr. Vanderslice, a chemistry Ph.D. who rose through the ranks at General Electric Co. and who was once the president of GTE Corp. 
His job was to guide Apollo's explosive growth. 
On his first day at the company, he was greeted by executives wearing sweat shirts emblazoned with the slogan "Billion Dollars or Bust." (Total sales in 1986 were $392 million.) 
Mr. Vanderslice replaced Mr. Poduska as chairman in 1984. 

   Meanwhile, on the West Coast, two M.B.A.s from Stanford University joined forces with two local computer whizzes and decided to build and sell work stations. 
All four men were 27 years old. 
Their strategy was markedly different from Apollo's. 
The four men believed the market wouldn't accept a work station custom-designed by unknown graduate students. 
So they devised a machine that used a standard operating system called Unix, originally designed by American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. 
It also was designed to communicate with other computers over Ethernet, a widely used local-area network. (In contrast, Apollo's first models used a custom-designed operating system and were incompatible with any computer network.) 
In 1982, Sun shipped its first product, the Sun-1. 

   The risk was plain: that another company could make a cheaper work station using the same standards. 
But, Mr. Joy says, "If you believe in change and your engineers are good, then you can adapt." 

   From the start, therefore, the companies were forced onto different paths. 
Apollo had a machine that was incompatible with other machines, higher in price and, by most measures, the superior product on the market. 
Sun, the newcomer, had a standardized machine, which was cheaper to produce, easier to sell to a varied market, and even easier to discount. 

   Then, Apollo took a few stumbles. 
In 1984, its main customers, the large semiconductor companies, went into a slump and stopped buying capital equipment. 
The slump occurred just months after Apollo completed an expensive factory and hired hundreds of new employees. 

   At the same time, customers were complaining about quality problems in Apollo machines and, rather rapidly, they started warming up to Sun's cheaper work stations. 
Apollo had to abandon its exclusive design and produce a work station that operates on standard software. (Today, all Apollo stations can use the Unix operating system.) 
With the help of Mr. Vanderslice, the company began broadening its customer base. 
Last year, profit was minimal, but by late 1986 the company had begun to turn around. 

   Sun, which never stumbled, continued to chop prices and to move relentlessly into Apollo's customer base. 
Recently, it dropped prices on its cheapest work station by 37% to $4,995, making it competitive with some personal computers. 
That work station is now half the price of Apollo's cheapest machine, and the price cutting elicits a sad shake of the head from Chairman Vanderslice. 
"I wouldn't have done that," he says. (Nonetheless, Apollo has had to follow the price-cutting trend and last month it slashed prices on its low-end models.) 

   How the battle proceeds from here is unknown, but many in the industry think the ultimate success of Apollo or Sun will depend on the very different personalities of the companies -- crucial factors in determing whether either company can rise to challenges or weather tough times. 

   Apollo is trying to build an image of solid, long-term reliability, both as a vendor and as an employer. 
Mr. Vanderslice says that the company's troubles and its recovery have made it more competitive and more mature. 
Its decisions generally come from the top. 

   The managers at Sun, in contrast, affect an attitude of sheer, unrestrained invincibility, and its corporate style embodies the open-collar, open-door, protocol-free ambiance of California. 

   At Sun, every Friday is a dress-down day. 
Most workers wear jeans and sport shirts. 
On April Fool's Day, by tradition, engineers must torment their bosses. 
This year they placed Mr. Joy's Ferrari on a platform in the middle of the company's decorative pond. 

   In previous years, the engineers disassembled an executive's car and reassembled it inside his office; they disassembled the man's office and reassembled it in the middle of the pond. 
The pattern is frighteningly clear, says Mr. Joy: "Car in office, office in pond, car in pond." 
Next year, he fears, he will find the pond in his office. 

   The office of Mr. McNealy, Sun's president, looks more like a '60s dorm room than a corporate suite. 
Pins on a wall map mark the top golf courses in the U.S. Also on the wall are a pair of flip-flops-with golf spikes. 
Robert R. Lux, a Sun vice president who was hired away from Apollo, says, "It was a real eye-opener for me when McNealy came in in a polo shirt and high-fived me in the hallway." 

   Mr. McNealy favors wide-open discussion among his managers and heated disputes in committees. 
Mr. McNealy brags that Sun has maintained the hothouse atmosphere of a start-up company. 
"We're a Fortune 500-size company," he says, "but I have trouble finding a parking space at 5:30." 

   In contrast, the parking lots in Chelmsford, at Apollo's low-rise headquarters, are almost empty in the evening and on weekends. 
Executives urge the staff to work harder. 
"We're pushing to get people to work the 41st hour every week," says Edward Zander, vice president for marketing. 

   The atmosphere is decidedly corporate, with closed doors, scheduled meetings and a library hush in the executive suite. 
Mr. Lux recalls: "It's more a buttoned-jacket style. 
From 9:15 to 9:20 you discuss an issue and at 9:20 you approve it." 

   Apollo's managers bristle at comparisons with Sun and the suggestion that they lack an entrepreneurial spirit. 
"There's a lot to be said for being professional," says Roland Pampel, senior vice president. 
"We have people doing a lot of fun stuff. 
That doesn't mean . . . you don't wear suits." 

   But managers have been instructed to encourage fun on the job. 
At a recent employee rally, the lordly Mr. Vanderslice startled workers by appearing on stage in a Luke Skywalker costume to do battle with a Darth Vader look-alike. 
Darth Vader sported a Sun logo on his chest. 

   Analysts award Mr. Vanderslice high marks for reviving Apollo. 
"He's doing what everyone thought he was the wrong kind of manager to do -- turning around an entrepreneurial company that got in trouble," says Richard Shaffer, the editor of Technologic Computer Letter. 
Mr. Vanderslice's key moves included controlling soaring costs, diversifying markets, and installing quality control to prevent work stations that were too often dead on delivery. 

   With the market growing rapidly, many analysts predict success for both companies. 
The big question is whether Apollo can keep up with its flashier competitor. 
Also important: If the market takes a twist, can the juggernaut Sun recover? 

   "Sun has the potential to be larger if it pulls off its plans," says Vicki Brown of International Data Corp., a market-research company. 
If times get tough, she says, "it could end up in a lot of trouble." 

   Much will depend on the behavior of the major computer makers. 
IBM is expected to become more competitive in the work-station market and Digital Equipment recently halved prices on some machines competing directly with Apollo's and Sun's. 
Hewlett-Packard is already a strong contender. 
Moreover, new personal computers by IBM and Apple have work-station power. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
