ID: 195	RANK: 32	SCORE: 10.201468
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880302-0097 </DOCNO>
<HL> Your Money Matters: Forget Stocks; Invest in George Patton, Old Lunch Boxes and 'Good Luck Charm' </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alexandra Peers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   People considering an investment in collectibles these days might want to stick with something safe. 

   Like Elvis Presley. 

   Four and a half months after the stock market crash, new investors in the collectibles markets are skittish. 
Buyers have become choosy and are staying on the sidelines. 
"Everyone is waiting for the other shoe to drop," says George Lowry, president of Swann Galleries, a New York auction house. 

   In such an environment, experts agree that a variety of items can be attractive for collectors with a speculative bent. 
Some memorabilia linked to Mr. Presley, for example, consistently command high prices. 
But the list of "caveat emptors" attached to such items is miles long. 

   "Antiques and collectibles are really not investments," cautions Samuel Pennington, editor of Maine Antique Digest. 
"The basic problem is you buy it retail and sell it wholesale." 

   Here, with a warning that many of the people quoted have a financial interest in the items they're discussing, is what the experts see as good investments in the collectibles market. 

   --AUTOGRAPHS: Since the stock market crash, collectors "are more selective," says James Lowe of James Lowe Autographs Ltd. in New York. 

   Indeed, the value of simple autographs appears to be lessening in relation to what dealers call "content" material -- signed letters or papers relating to the famous person's life. 
"As collectors get more sophisticated, it's terribly important" to have more than a signature, says Mr. Lowry of Swann Galleries. 

   For example, an Abraham Lincoln signature might cost between $800 and $1,200, says Thomas Lingenfelter, president of Heritage Collector's Society, a Lansdale, Pa., dealership. 
But last year, he notes, a collector paid $150,000 for a Lincoln speech about inventions that also featured his autograph. 

   Looking to the future, material signed by George Patton and Martin Luther King Jr. is appreciating in value, says Mr. Lowe. 
A routine letter by Mr. King with authenticated signature might sell for as much as $500. 

   On the other had, Theodore Roosevelt seems to be on the way out. 
Although his signatures are popular with collectors, they aren't that valuable because Roosevelt letters are widely available, says Mr. Lingenfelter. 

   --RARE BOOKS: The rare-book market has been invigorated recently by the sales of material from the estate of Carrie Estelle Doheny, a Los Angeles philanthropist. 
Her holdings, which included a first volume of the Gutenberg Bible and illuminated manuscripts, are being auctioned off over a two-year period by Christie's, a subsidiary of Christie's PLC of London. 
Several items have already set record prices and garnered headlines world-wide. 

   As in other markets for art and collectibles, Japanese buyers are putting upward pressure on prices. 
"If you want to start a collection," even of such 20th-century authors as William Faulkner, Ernest Hemingway and John Steinbeck, "you better have a lot of money," says William Self, a Los-Angeles-based producer who has an extensive collection of works by Charles Dickens. 

   Also enjoying a surge or resurgence in popularity are Rudyard Kipling, literature by women and books on labor history. 
Detective fiction -- from Fu Manchu novels by Sax Rohmer to Agatha Christie first editions -- are showing strength. 

   Dealers point to John Updike works and novels by "beat" authors and poets -- such as Allen Ginsberg, William Burroughs and Jack Kerouac -- as the next hot markets. 

   --POP CULTURE: To the traditional collectibles attributes, such as rarity and beauty of design, add an intangible "kitsch" or camp value that attracts members of the baby-boom generation. 
Dealers say they have seen a surge in interest in popular-culture items, including Teddy bears, lunch boxes and board games based on 1950s and 1960s television shows -- a market niche that received respectability from a recent exhibition of board games at the Museum of the City of New York. 

   The business is "heart-driven," says one collector, and doesn't always follow the laws of supply and demand. 
For example, while many dealers readily admit that there is a glut of so-called Disneyana (memorabilia emblazoned with Walt Disney characters), collectors so love the characters that all but the most recent items continue to escalate in value. 

   For those prone to long shots, collectibles that experts still consider undervalued include recent toys -- like Darth Vader figurines based on the "Star Wars" movies -- decorative telephones, and early-model televisions and personal computers. 

   --"THE KING": Connoisseurs may scoff -- "some people don't think that's serious collecting," says Mr. Lowry, somewhat charitably -- but Elvis Presley memorabilia rank among the most swiftly appreciating collectibles in the country. 
Says Mr. Lingenfelter, "Elvis collecting is hot stuff." 

   Jerry Osborne, publisher of DISCoveries, a magazine for record collectors, says Mr. Presley is "the No. 1 most collectible artist in the world." 
While selected Beatles albums in mint condition may fetch higher prices, 40 separate Elvis recordings are now worth a minimum of $1,000 each, he says. 

   But unwary fans should note that seemingly minute features can make all the difference: A test version of Mr. Presley's 1962 hit "Good Luck Charm" that plays at 33 1/3 revolutions per minute is valued at $3,000; the standard 45-rpm version is worth about $15. 

   As for Elvis trinkets and memorabilia, most valuable are posters and menus relating to Mr. Presley's last Las Vegas concerts and items made in the 1950s under the Elvis Presley Enterprises label, says Steven Templeton, contributing author of "Elvis Collectibles." 
He says an Elvis Presley doll that sold for $3 in 1957 and $120 in 1978, would now fetch upward of $1,800 in mint condition. 

   Mr. Templeton doesn't find that at all surprising. 
After all, he says, "There's Elvis Presley, and then there's everybody else." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
