ID: 195	RANK: 46	SCORE: 9.207359
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870427-0059 </DOCNO>
<HL> Man-Made Microbe
Finally Gets a Taste
Of Forbidden Fruit
---
Advanced Genetic Sciences
Starts Long-Delayed Test
Of Its Frostban Bacteria
---
By Marilyn Chase
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AGSI BIOT
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Neither lawsuits, nor TV cameras, nor vandals in the dead of night were able, in the end, to stop the long-postponed rendezvous between a microbe and a strawberry leaf. 

   Advanced Genetic Sciences Inc. dispatched a heavily suited sprayer at dawn Friday to test its Frostban bacteria -- known scientifically as pseudomonas syringae -- on less than an acre of strawberry plants about 30 miles east of San Francisco. 

   The bacteria have been altered by the deletion of a gene for a frost-promoting protein. 
Without that protein, damaging ice crystals don't form on the stems and leaves of plants, explained company scientist Trevor Suslow. 

   After four years of litigation, and opposition by residents of the tiny town of Brentwood, Calif., the field test was cleared by Superior Court Judge Darrel W. Lewis. 
Judge Lewis on Thursday denied a last-ditch effort by the Washington-based Foundation on Economic Trends, a regulatory-body watchdog organization, and local environmental groups to enjoin the spraying. 

   At about 3 a.m. PDT Friday, unidentified foes of the experiment evaded guards, cut through a fence, and entered the strawberry plot, tearing out about 80% of the plants, according to a company officer. 

   "Somebody tried to take matters into their own hands. 
Our people arrived at about 4 a.m., saw that the plants were still alive and replanted them. 
The test commenced at 6," said Kaley Parkinson, chief financial officer. 

   As the sun rose, there unfolded an opportunity to photograph the unseen: a ring of TV cameras surrounding the strawberry patch, a phalanx of Environmental Protection Agency officers, corporate officials and guards, all focused on the now slightly bruised strawberry plants, wearing their invisible coat of Frostban. 

   It doesn't freeze in April in Brentwood. 
However, this isn't viewed as an impediment to the test, Mr. Parkinson said. 
In a couple of weeks, the plants will be uprooted again and carted to a laboratory for a simulated freeze to test the bug's protective power. 

   The test wasn't the first release of a genetically engineered organism in the U.S., but it was the first such sanctioned test. 
Advanced Genetic Sciences, as previously reported, was fined several years ago for spraying the microbes on some trees on the roof of the company's Oakland, Calif., headquarters without authorization. 
It called Friday's authorized test "a great day not only for biotechnology but for California's reputation as a leader in regulatory review." 

   Opponents, exhausted by their long legal battle, promised that more such fights lie ahead. 

   "They did it," sighed a weary Jeremy Rifkin, founder of the Foundation on Economic Trends, after the spraying took place. 
"Four years ago, when we brought suit, the sum total of public discussion of biotechnology was a 19-minute hearing at the National Institutes of Health's RAC (recombinant DNA advisory) Committee," he said. 
"Now, there's a world-wide discussion about the biotechnology revolution. 
And I think we're all better off for it -- even the companies who yelled and screamed." 

   Mr. Rifkin scoffed at the company's repeated assurances of Frostban's safety, saying the bug "could be pathogenic." 
He added, "That's why the sprayers had to wear those Darth Vader suits." 

   Moreover, he put companies on notice that he will continue to stir up public debate on such experiments. 
His next battleground will be in Peppin County, Wis., where, he said, BioTechnica International Inc., of Cambridge, Mass., plans to test a nitrogen-fixing microbe on alfalfa plants. 

   "If the first experiment took four years to address, think of what the next experiments will take," he said. 
"It's gonna be a long battle." 

   Separately, the University of California at Berkeley said Friday that its scientists will initiate a similar experiment in a potato patch in Tulelake, Calif., near the Oregon border, on Wednesday. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
