ID: 195	RANK: 53	SCORE: 8.744137
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870306-0122 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
In Japan, It's the Three S's That Count
---
By Joseph Adelson</HL>
<DD> 03/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   I have been amazing friends and neighbors by mentioning to them a stray fact gleaned from Merry White's excellent book, "The Japanese Educational Challenge: A Commitment to Children" (Free Press, 210 pages, $18.95). 
In Japanese schools, a student who dyes his hair is punished as if he committed an act of violence. 
Whatever else we make of that startling information, it reminds us that Japan is a different society from our own, governed by entirely different norms on such matters as standards of decorum and children's relation to authority. 
Hence, as Ms. White several times reminds us, we cannot easily transfer to the American scene any "lessons" from Japan's prodigious achievements in elementary and secondary education. 

   Prodigious they are. 
The great triumph of post-war Japan, we now understand, is neither Nikon nor Toyota, but a system of public schooling that has become the world's best. 
Other nations do better in training their elites -- culling the most gifted of the young and educating them to high levels of accomplishment. 
That is what we ourselves seem to be doing, without quite facing up to it: savage competition for and at the top (Nobel Prizes and extraordinary feats of scholarship); yet middling work at most colleges, and semiliteracy in many high schools. 
The Japanese have not yet developed impressive competence in higher education, focusing instead on the years through high school. 
Nearly all of their youngsters are graduated -- over 90% -- and to a level often equivalent to the college diploma in the U.S. 

   When news of this reached us, our response was divided between a "gee whiz" school -- a boggled admiration -- and various "yes, but" positions. 
Yes, the Japanese stuff their kids' heads full of facts, but they also stamp out any spark of originality. 
Yes, those who survive may know a lot, but they are being driven crazy -- just look at those incredible suicide rates. 

   As to the latter, the Japanese suicide rate among the young is in fact somewhat lower than our own. 
As to stifling originality, the charge is arguable, and in any case rests upon a sentimental view of creativity, which detaches innovation from its roots in mastery. 

   Ms. White is not herself transfixed by Japanese-American comparisons, although of course she discusses them. 
Her approach can be termed ethnographic. 
She gives particular attention to the young child's close bond to the mother, which serves as a prototype for the later dependency upon the social group. 
That early closeness provides "the motivation to work well in the classroom, and eventually to form deeper ties to work teams." 
The child is taught the sanctity of effort, at school and in the work place, both of which are termed "moral environments" where "a person's virtue is tied to his performance." 
She concludes a central chapter of the book with these words: "The reason why Japanese industry works and why Japanese schools teach, why workers don't quit and why children don't drop out of school, is that what is most wanted out of life -- stability, security and support -- are acquired through effort and commitment. 
This lesson is taught to the young, at home and at school." 

   That is as close to a thesis as Ms. White will allow herself, in a book blessedly free of the apodictic mode. 
She offers instead perceptive portrayals of parents, students and teachers, of the milieus they occupy, and of the climate of effort and excellence that envelops them. 
There are a number of surprises. 
The elementary students are lively and enthusiastic, in no way obedient robots meekly memorizing trivia. 
We also learn that despite the respect and remuneration given the Japanese teacher, his is a stressful job. 
The year is long, the classes are large, the pressures intense, particularly pressures from parents who feel their children are not doing well enough and want them pushed harder. 

   They will indeed be pushed harder when they enter the high-school years and the intensified preparation for those final examinations that mean so much -- too much -- to their future. 
If elementary schooling is the Good Mother, nurturant and eductive, the examination period (Examination Hell) is the Black Knight, the Darth Vader of Japanese adolescence. 
Ms. White does not like the examination system, nor does anyone else. 
Yet it survives, perhaps out of a superstitious conviction that a dose of tyranny keeps the mind clear and the will toughened. 

   What makes the Japanese system work so well? 
Ms. White does not offer a single answer. 
It is a seamless web -- the strong family structure, the mother's fierce devotion, the near-universal commitment to effort, the long school year, the able teachers, perhaps the after-school private schools, perhaps even Examination Hell itself. 
All of these and a dozen other factors no doubt play a part, but why and how and how much there is no sure way of knowing. 
Is it in fact a Japanese success? 
Or is it East Asian? 
Or will it be found, as I suspect, in any culture where parents are ready to give themselves over totally to the cultivation of the child? 

   ---
   Mr. Adelson is professor of psychology at the University of Michigan. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
