ID: 195	RANK: 67	SCORE: 7.965996
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871127-0056 </DOCNO>
<HL> Digging for Insights,
Two Anthropologists
Find Rare Treasures
---
Their Study of Garage Sales
Classifies Buyers, Sellers;
The Browser and the Bored
---
By Clare Ansberry
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Anthropologist Stephen Soiffer considers western New York ripe for his digs. 
There, he unearthed Tarzan. 

   Rummaging at a Buffalo site, he discovered the rare find: a nine-inch-wide, lime-green, polyester tie featuring Edgar Rice Burroughs' ape man and mate Jane. 
Mr. Soiffer snapped it up for a quarter. 
His digs? 
A garage sale. 

   For six years, the University of Rochester researcher and another anthropologist, Gretchen Herrmann, have haunted hundreds of garage sales, interviewing buyers and sellers to analyze this slice of modern Americana. 
They have even published two scholarly articles. 
The latest, in Britain's Sociological Review, is titled "Visions of Power: Ideology and Practice in the American Garage Sale." 
Ms. Herrmann, a librarian at the State University of New York at Cortland, is completing her doctorate in anthropology with a dissertation on -- what else? -- garage sales. 

   "Garage sales sound kind of silly," says David Givens, a spokesman for the American Anthropologist Association, "but out of minutiae come some pretty interesting facts." 
Although he doesn't know of any other anthropologists analyzing garage sales, he says several examine garbage. 
That gets them known as garbalogists. 

   Besides yielding insights into society, garage sales generate $2 billion in annual revenues, Mr. Soiffer estimates, a sum that, "as a single entity, would put them in the Fortune 500." 
In 1984, garage sales outnumbered births and deaths combined. 

   The origin of the garage (a.k.a. rummage) sale isn't known. 
But after examining 60 years of classified ads in local newspapers, the Soiffer-Herrmann team contends that the sales emerged in the 1960s as more Americans moved into suburban homes with garages. 

   Now, on virtually every weekend in virtually every U.S. town of any size, someone is trying to unload worn National Geographics or size-16 pants. 
Such sales are "a tribute to the material culture we live in," Ms. Herrmann contends. 
At one, she discovered a spongy wad that acts as a doorknob cover and looks like a shower cap for a Barbie doll. 
"Where else but in America could you get this?" she asks. 

   Adds Mr. Soiffer: "Garage sales make sense in a world where K mart exists. 
They don't make sense in Africa," where there are far fewer disposable goods. 
Or Switzerland, where selling family heirlooms would be like selling family members, contended a horrified Swiss couple at one sale. 
Or Brazil, where it is considered a sign of desperation. 

   The two anthropologists have -- predictably -- classified the people at the sales. 
Based on the motives of each, they have developed 11 categories of buyers and 10 of sellers. 
"You've got to be kidding," exclaims Beverly Nuzum, scanning the categories to determine where she fits in. 

   Holding a sale, the Upper St. Clair, Pa., housewife can't decide whether she is a Housecleaner or a Desperate Straits. 
She opts for the latter: Her garage is chilly and, even in her gray sweatsuit, she's cold. 
The unsteady stream of browsers has dwindled to an unsteady trickle. 
No one has touched her old skis or yogurt maker, and someone just told her the 35mm camera she hoped would fetch $30 is worthless because the shutter doesn't work. 
"Don't mean to be cruel," says the man, holding the camera to the light, "but all you've got here is an interesting doorstop." 

   The Herrmann-Soiffer team undoubtedly would classify Mrs. Nuzum as a Dabbler, a first-time garage-sale entrepreneur. 
The Dabbler can find the whole thing unnerving. 
Mrs. Nuzum, for instance, couldn't sleep the night before her sale. 

   Lynn Metrulis, of Ithaca, N.Y., is certifiably a Veteran. 
Her 10th annual garage sale, which includes a preview party for a select list of buyers, draws hundreds, including her groupies. 
They are a local country and Western band whose members comb the sale for a year's supply of cowboy boots, and a local contingent of punkers in search of weird jewelry. 
Business is brisk. 

   "I went to Europe on the proceeds one year and built a stockade fence around my yard another," she says. 

   For many people selling old treasures, the scourge shopper is the Retailer, the Darth Vader of garage sales. 
Retailers typically arrive in a dark van hours -- even days -- before the sale to buy the best antiques and glassware for resale at a used-goods store or flea market. 

   The more typical purchasers are Social Buyers, who frequent sales just as other people frequent bars and dances -- to mingle. 
They "pride themselves on their garage-sale expertise because it establishes their social position in the garage-sale set," the researchers explain. 

   There are Bargain Hunters, Browsers and the Bored, who simply have time to kill, plus the Habituals, who look to garage sales out of necessity or, the researchers say, a "quasi-ideological rejection of consumerism." (Loosely translated by a 40-year-old maintenance man: "Stores charge an arm and a leg for trash, just trash. 
So, if you can get your trash cheap, you should.") 

   Habituals display practically a religious fanaticism about garage sales. 
One unemployed woman told the researchers that she used much of her meager money at garage sales, with any leftover funds going to feed her children. 
"If I were a minister and could preach about garage sales, I would because I believe in them so much," she said. (Not everyone does, though. 
U.S. Catholic magazine, in a 1982 article, contended that garage sales aren't Christian because unwanted household items should be donated to the needy.) 

   Still, garage sales, like bingo, are imbedded in popular culture, says Jack Nachbar, a popular-culture professor at Bowling Green State University, who adds that he finds garage sales a lot more interesting. 

   Besides, a keen-eyed shopper can capture history. 
An occasional garage-sale shopper, Mr. Nachbar bought a set of four late-1940s cocktail glasses. 
On the outside of the glasses are pictures of fully clothed women; inside, the women are nude. 
"They reflect the peekaboo repression of the era," he maintains. 
"Hey, at 25 cents apiece, I couldn't turn it down." 

   Whether or not garage sales help preserve history, they surely ease the nation's garbage-disposal problem, Mr. Soiffer asserts. 
"We've got mounds of stuff produced each year. 
Keeping it in circulation keeps it out of the garbage," he says. 

   So popular have garage sales become, they have spawned a whole genre of imitations. 
Armco Inc., the Parsippany, N.J., steel producer, unloaded electric and plumbing supplies and office furniture at its "garage sale" a few years ago. 
The city of Detroit, facing a $44 million deficit in 1976, raised $100,000 selling, among other things, urinals and a hood from a Buick. 
Eager buyers clogged city streets for two miles. 
More than a dozen "World's Largest Garage Sale" have been held; among places vying for the title are Duncan, Okla.; Cadillac, Mich.; Mount Lebanon, Pa.; and Evanston, Ill. 

   Everyone, it seems, has tried a knockoff. 
Or almost everyone. 
"As far as I know, the Defense Department hasn't had one," Mr. Soiffer says. 
"No one could afford the toilet seats." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
