ID: 195	RANK: 68	SCORE: 7.935323
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870909-0107 </DOCNO>
<HL> Europe:
Ostpolitik's Pull on the German Psyche
---
By Thomas F. O'Boyle</HL>
<DD> 09/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP FREST
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
AEROSPACE (ARO)
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Erich Honecker has come home to a hero's welcome. 
The East German party chief, who Monday returned to his "Vaterland" after a 39-year absence, has been feted, wined and dined for two days now amid near hysteria by the press. 

   Even the Darth Vader of German politics, Bavarian governor Franz Josef Strauss, seems willing to forgive and forget Mr. Honecker's standing order to shoot escapees or the role he played in building the Berlin Wall. 
In Munich Friday, the arch conservative Mr. Strauss will lunch with -- not on -- the Communist leader as Mr. Honecker winds up his historic five-day trip. 

   What gives? 
What are those enigmatic Germans up to now? 

   Ever since Willy Brandt knelt in 1970 at the memorial to Jews killed in the Warsaw ghetto, the prospect of a rapprochement with Eastern Europe has had a tremendous pull on the German psyche. 
That pull has intensified since the U.S.-Soviet summit at Reykjavik last year. 
The likelihood of a superpower arms pact that would strip West Germany of the missile defenses that Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats fought so hard to install is adding to anxiety about the U.S. willingness to come to Germany's defense. 
It has also stimulated a lot of discussion and thought about foreign-policy alternatives. 

   One option, some Germans believe, lies to the East in a more aggressive "Ostpolitik." 
Another lies to the West in the "French connection," the building of a European pillar at the heart of the Atlantic Alliance. 
And while neither is really a true alternative, the Germans are in a typically Germanlike quandary. 
Their confidence in America has been severely damaged and they are being pulled between two poles. 

   Mr. Kohl has recommended formation of a joint German-French brigade and, later this month, the two nations will engage in their most extensive joint military exercise ever. 
Yet Bonn simultaneously has opened a cautious dialogue with East Berlin, which will undoubtedly be extended by Mr. Honecker's visit. 

   Still, while the sight of the two Germanys cavorting together may give the average European indigestion -- and might ruin the average Frenchman's entire meal -- Mr. Honecker's trip has absolutely nothing to do with German reunification. 
The Soviets would never allow it, and Mr. Kohl's government has all but abandoned it as a serious goal. 
Instead, the emphasis is on strengthening human bonds through partnerships and cultural and scientific exchanges, which in part explains the bear hug the West Germans have given Mr. Honecker. 

   Germany is a battered nation that carries deep psychological scars. 
It is cut off from its roots, still trying to find its identity. 
And the guilt the nation feels is perhaps greatest for the 17 million East Germans it effectively imprisoned through its misdeeds. 
West Germans desperately want to preserve contacts with Germans on the other side of the grim, 863-mile-long border who, it fears, have already drifted away. 

   But West Germany's warm welcoming of Mr. Honecker also reflects a national "Zeitgeist" that is in a state of flux. 
More than half of the West German population was born after 1945. 
Many young Germans now argue they are not responsible for the sins of another generation. 
Mr. Kohl, too, has tried to bury the past, or at least not be shackled by it. 
He often calls himself the first postwar chancellor and has urged his countrymen to become more patriotic. 

   Whatever the reasons for Germany's reassessment of itself, the economic giant but longtime political dwarf is without a doubt more inclined to assert its independence these days. 
Germany's willingness to put its own interests first -- in defending disaffected farmers -- is witnessed best, perhaps, by Bonn's recent refusals to go along with the Common Market in a number of areas. 
It is also seen in the country's stubborn refusal to stimulate its economy. 
Domestic concerns -- about inflation and widening budget deficits -- take precedence over international ones. 

   A country defending its own interests is normal. 
But what makes Germany's new "normality" abnormal is that once it was 100% behind European integration. 
Now, that no longer is true. 

   At the same time, Germans seem more concerned about their sovereignty, probably because it has been so limited since 1945. 
Whether the U.S. seeks to deploy nuclear missiles on German soil or negotiate to withdraw them, politicians on both the left and the right like to portray themselves as defending German interests. 
This preoccupation with sovereignty has, as one Western diplomat put it, fueled "a weariness with the Atlantic Alliance and a growing romanticism about alternatives." 

   Those alternatives range from the sublime to the ridiculous. 
Green Party deputy Otto Schily, for instance, suggests a "Mitteleuropa" peace union that would lead to the gradual dissolution of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact. 
The two Germanys and their neighbors would serve as an East-West "buffer zone" in this neutralization process. 

   There are troubles, too, with the more reasonable options. 
Although the Germans don't think closer ties to Eastern Europe necessarily conflict with ties to France, the French do. 
They worry about German neutrality and pacifism and, as a result, won't let a German finger anywhere near their nuclear button. 
The West Germans, on the other hand, reinforce this split by suggesting that the French, in the targeting of their nuclear weapons, should consider the sovereignty of all German territory, West and East. 

   Ultimately, however, there are no real security alternatives, since West Germany, a non-nuclear nation, depends on the U.S. for its defense. 
But the reliability of that guarantee has been called into question lately. 
President Reagan's inexplicable behavior at Reykjavik -- his willingness to discuss far-reaching denuclearization proposals without first consulting the NATO allies -- and the subsequent negotiations on Euromissiles have deeply shaken the Germans, much more, perhaps, than U.S. policy makers understand. 

   The depth of the right wing's disappointment with the U.S. was driven home for me recently in a conversation with Juergen Todenhoefer, a Christian Democratic Party spokesman for defense matters. 
Speaking with great emotion, Mr. Todenhoefer told of his small children, who, he said, have grown up during the 1980s under police surveillance. 
It was necessary, he explained, because of the death threats he and his family received during and after the Pershing missile deployment, which Mr. Todenhoefer, who still calls himself a "friend of America," and his party supported unflaggingly. 
Even today, he occasionally receives death threats. 

   "In Reykjavik, the American administration tried to find solutions for the U.S. and the Soviet Union. 
But they didn't care at all about the concerns of my country. 
We weren't even consulted," he said. 
"Is it any wonder we feel confused and betrayed?" 

   Indeed, the U.S. would do well to remember -- when, for instance, weighing possible troop withdrawals from Europe -- that its behavior might dictate the kind of reception Mr. Honecker gets on his next trip to Bonn. 

   ---
   Mr. O'Boyle is The Wall Street Journal's correspondent in Bonn. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
