ID: 195	RANK: 77	SCORE: 6.883084
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890808-0003 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890808 </DD>
<AN> 890808-0003. </AN>
<HL> Labor of Love:
@  At an Arizona Mine
@  Workers Were Wooed
@  Away From the Union
@  ---
@  Cyprus Used Raises, Feedback
@  And 'Charm School' Class
@  Instead of Strong-Arming
@  ---
@  Anguish Over Lost Seniority
@  ----
@  By Marj Charlier
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 08/08/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> LABOR CYM </CO>
<DATELINE> MIAMI, Ariz.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As part of her duties as Teamster steward in the copper mine here, Mary Hughes used to walk up to the assignment window every day and shove a grievance under her boss's nose. 
He developed a twitch above his left eye that would recur whenever he saw her. 

   "We were always at each other's throats," she recalls. 
"It was unbelievably hostile." 

   Today, the ore-truck driver and her same boss, Jack Dodson, kid around like old buddies, and she is bucking for a promotion. 
But then, she is no longer a Teamster. 

   In May, Ms. Hughes and her fellow Teamster and United Steelworkers members at Cyprus Minerals Co.'s Miami copper mine turned their backs on about 50 years of union history in this dry, narrow valley 90 miles east of Phoenix, rejecting union representation by a convincing 2-to-1 margin. 
"You'd think a community that was a union stronghold like this would be union forever," says Charles Sandoval, president of the Steelworkers local at a neighboring mine. 

   But it isn't, and the nagging question for union organizers is why. 
Worker frustration with the declining clout and responsiveness of organized labor had some effect. 
The company's new approach to labor relations, however, may have meant more. 
"Cyprus pulled a little coup here," Mr. Sandoval concedes. 

   Cyprus did it without the usual strong-arm tactics. 
To win the hearts and minds of the union work force, the company, led by President Kenneth Barr, used a mesmerizing psychological campaign that included seminars -- "charm school" sessions, the workers called them -- to close the decades-wide gulf between managers and workers. 

   The company also curried favor by more traditional means: raises, changes in work rules, cross-training and a push for a safer workplace. 
"Cyprus came along and showed me there is a better way," says a converted Ms. Hughes. 

   Unsurprisingly, not everyone agrees that things are better. 
Old-timers complain about new policies that prize youth and enterprise over seniority. 
And some dislike having to learn additional tasks. 
Even within families, divisions have developed over the benefits or drawbacks of unions. 

   But Cyprus's approach has received the attention of the industry, much to the chagrin of union supporters. 
"There's no question this is spreading," says Tino Torrez, the Steelworkers' subdistrict director for New Mexico and Arizona. 
"We've got to educate our people and prepare them" for what the union considers self-serving company tactics that won't serve the workers' best interests in the long run. 

   Cyprus's quiet triumph is surprising in a traditionally strife-torn industry. 
Mining labor history, after all, encompasses the massacres of workers at Matewan, W.Va., and Ludlow, Colo., early in the century. 
The industry also nursed the Wobblies, as the radical International Workers of the World were known. 
Arizona mining companies once solved union problems by loading union agitators onto railroad cattle cars at gunpoint and "deporting" them to the deserts of neighboring states. 

   "Historically, mining companies have been behind the times in making changes" in labor relations, says Thomas Raleigh, a Dallas management consultant. 

   Even today, Cyprus's experience stands in stark contrast to the combative wildcat strikes and work stoppages tearing apart Eastern mines as the United Mine Workers struggles to reassert itself with its dwindling membership. 
For miners in the West, where the UMW has never gained a foothold, that dispute has been a distant clap of thunder. 
But the West hasn't been exempt from labor strife. 
After a violent, 18-month strike at Phelps Dodge Corp.'s nearby Morenci, Ariz., mine, replacement workers decertified their unions in 1986. 

   Inexorably, the ties that bind mine workers to their unions have been weakening under the weight of frequent mine closings and wage concessions. 
Overall union membership in U.S. mines has dropped from about 256,000, or 35% of the work force in 1977, to only 133,000, or 19% in 1988. 
Moreover, pay increases over the years have raised miners' living standards and reduced militancy. 
Miners make an average of $758 a week in Arizona today, up from $171 a week 20 years ago and $40 a week in the heyday of the unions in the early 1940s (not accounting for inflation's effect). 

   Some mining companies have strived to switch to nonunion operations while avoiding the usual bitterness and hostility. 
By permitting workers at two mines in Gillette, Wyo., to vote on new shifts, new equipment and new benefit packages, among other things, Amax Coal Industries, a subsidiary of Amax Inc., has had labor peace since the mine unions were decertified in the mid-1970s. 

   Cyprus, a Denver-based company that was spun off from Amoco Corp. in 1985, when many oil companies were divesting nonoil assets, certainly has benefited from the approach. 
It has just three unionized operations among the 51 silver, gold, copper, coal and industrial-minerals mines and mills it operates in 23 states and six foreign countries. 
Among mines acquired by Cyprus, only the Miami union even tried to reinstate itself after being dislodged. 
Cyprus's success with the approach has contributed to a doubling of revenue and an eightfold increase in earnings the past two years. 

   Given this record, industry analysts expect the Dr. Goodvibes approach to continue to catch on. 
It already has labor on the run at the Magma Copper Co. mine next door. 
In a recently signed three-year contract, Magma miners accepted an average raise of $1 an hour in the first year after demanding $3, the amount they gave back in 1986 concessions. 
"We sure didn't want to go on strike," says Mr. Sandoval, the Steelworkers leader. 
"The old days of throwing rocks are over with." 

   The story of organized labor's fall from grace here began when Cyprus bought the mine in July 1988 from Inspiration Resources Corp. 
Because it was an asset purchase, the new company didn't have to honor the previous management's union contract. 
Cyprus fired everyone at Miami, in effect abrogating the labor agreement, then rehired all but 40 of the mine's 1,000 workers -- with raises of $1 or $2 an hour. 
Job classifications were slashed from 240 to nine, and workers were offered further raises for learning multiple jobs. 

   "We were all told that it was going to be different, no more harassment," says Ms. Hughes, the former Teamster steward. 
"We didn't believe a word of it." 

   But the company didn't threaten workers or badmouth the union. 
It's easy to drum up hostility for Darth Vader, but how do you confront Mr. Rogers? 
"They scared the hell out of people by being nice to them," says Mr. Sandoval. 
"People around here weren't used to that." 

   Workers were also finding that life without unions had benefits. 
Without the union contract as an unbending rulebook, bosses started giving extra days off. 
Truck drivers could get out and walk around the truck when they got sleepy without fear of being yelled at by a passing foreman. 

   The new relationship was strengthened through another Cyprus innovation: It sent everyone, from truck drivers to the mine's general manager, to the small-group "charm school" seminars that emphasized transactional analysis, a psychological approach best known for the slogan: "I'm OK, you're OK." 

   In seeking to end the traditional parent-child relationship between management and labor, the sessions reinforced the notions that problems could be resolved one-to-one and that the best ideas come from the workers on the line, if they are encouraged to pass them on. 
The message, says Richard A. Wittmeyer, the organizational behavioralist who led the seminars, was "we're all adults here." 

   Jake Timmers, the mine's general manager for 11 years, met Ms. Hughes, the former union steward, for the first time at a communication seminar. 
Initially, they engaged in some fiery exchanges; gradually, he grew to respect her ambition. 
"Her way to progress as a person had been to be a union leader," he says. 

   With new lines of communication thus opened, emboldened workers started calling the human resources office to suggest that certain retrogressing managers be re-enrolled in charm school. 
At regular meetings, managers sought their workers' advice -- and actually implemented what they heard. 
At the rod plant, workers got management to toss out the operations manual and let them reconfigure the rollers and guides that pull the molten copper into a continuous copper rod. 
Production and quality rose significantly. 
"A vast amount of knowledge had been wasted here," says the rod-plant manager, Ken Watkins. 

   For some workers, the communication and psychological sessions were persuasive, but disquieting. 
"They've got a point. 
If you don't work together, you lose," says Chuy Canizales, a smelter worker, former union steward and still a staunch union supporter. 
"I was buying into it for a while. 
Then I thought, my God, they're brainwashing us." 

   Cyprus wasn't looking to brainwash anyone, insists Mr. Barr, the company's president and chief executive, who was the main architect of the nice-guy philosophy. 
The approach, he insists, was simply a survival tactic at a time of a severe industry slump. 
"We wanted to get communications going so we could find out ways of running the mine better," he says. 
That didn't come from any epiphany or newfangled philosophy, he asserts, "that's something you learn from the time you play in Little League." 

   Many workers didn't need brainwashing anyway. 
They were ready for change. 
Increasingly, miners saw their unions as big businesses themselves, more interested in self-preservation than in helping the little guy and impotent to fight off givebacks. 
"You just get tired of the union making promises and promises and we never got anything," says smelter worker Jerry Cano, who couldn't get union financial aid to help feed his eight children during five layoffs in 13 years. 

   Mr. Sandoval, the union official, says declining copper prices and the prospect of more layoffs limited what the union could do. 
"We did what we had to to keep people's jobs," he says. 

   But people here are still surprised that the unions went so quietly. 
The first unions were organized here before World War II. 
Up on Moonshine Hill, where Inspiration Copper once housed its salaried workers, managers' children learned early that the company and the mines were on the side of good: "God gives all good things to industry," boasts a frieze over the front door of the now-closed elementary school. 

   Working-class children, however, grew up with unions in their blood. 
"From the time they were old enough to know what was going on, it was 'us vs. them, the people vs. the company,'" says Mr. Watkins, the rod-plant supervisor. 

   Understandably, then, the union issue has been divisive, even within families. 
Mike Guadiana, a manager in the human-relations department who believes, of course, that unions aren't necessary, drove his sister-in-law to the hospital the day she delivered her son Ralph, now an adamantly pro-union miner. 
And Mike's brother Bob is a district director for the Steelworkers union in Los Angeles. 

   Although Mike feels strong ties to his godson and his brother, the issue keeps them apart. 
"Naw, we don't talk much," Mike says sadly. 
He admits he doesn't even know when his brother is in town. 

   Retired miners have the toughest time accepting the company line. 
Bitter memories of management linger for Peter Hernandez, now 80 and retired for 19 years. 
He and his wife raised eight children in a two-room shack. 
After three years on the job, he was given four hours' vacation. 
But because the workers' buses to the mine didn't run in the middle of the day, he had to spend the vacation sleeping in a room at the smelter. 

   "Better wages, working conditions, hospital plans -- everything you can mention -- came from the union," he says, complaining that today's young workers have no sense of what the union won for them. 
"They didn't go through what we did," he says. 
"They think because they have it made now, it's always been this way." 

   Union seniority rules guaranteed Dale Van Meter's job. 
As he stares at TV screens and gauges that monitor the flow of molten copper, the 19-year veteran complains about being forced to teach his job to newcomers. 
"This used to be the best job in the plant, and now they're giving it away," he says bitterly. 
"I'm cutting my own throat." 

   Mr. Cano, the smelter worker, defends the company. 
"Everybody says the union got us this and got us that," he says. 
"But times change. 
Now we have no union dues, no contract, and the company listens." 

   His brother-in-law, Mr. Canizales, remains a staunch union backer. 
"It's not fair that the senior people are being overlooked," he contends. 
The new, younger miners "are only thinking of themselves." 
But even he finds it tough to work up a proper froth while surrounded by a color-TV set, a VCR, stereo components and ceiling fans. 
Having been promoted to senior technician after learning every job at the smelter, even his work has become more fulfilling. 

   Life in the mining town is pretty nice now, he concedes. 
The only problem at the moment: His air conditioning is on the blink. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
