ID: 195	RANK: 85	SCORE: 5.532281
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870522-0152 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Lucas Speaks: 'Star Wars' Is a Rose Is a Rose...
---
By Stephen J. Sansweet</HL>
<DD> 05/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Try not. 
Do. 
Or do not. 
There is no try. 

   -- Yoda, the Jedi Master
   Ten years ago in a galaxy really not that far away, a tenacious film maker and born daydreamer finally let some of the images rolling around in his head escape onto the screen for what he thought might be a nice, moderately successful children's film. 

   The board of directors of the studio that paid $10 million to make this outer-space soap opera thought they had a turkey on their hands when they attended a preview. 
So much for Hollywood prescience. 

   For the Force was with George Lucas and his "Star Wars" trilogy (which also includes "The Empire Strikes Back" and "Return of the Jedi"). 
It made film history -- and about $4 billion in world-wide sales of movie tickets and everything from miniature spaceships to vinyl wallpaper. 
When a giant Star Destroyer whooshed over the heads of the audience after the now-famous written prologue, Mr. Lucas grabbed the kids he sought, but also awoke childhood memories in millions of adults. 

   The "Star Wars" phenomenon also had its dark side. 
It spawned mindless imitations in which the loud and off-kilter special effects were the stars and good writing and plot were ignored. 
It also led to a decade of teen-age exploitation films that attempted -- usually unsuccessfully -- to reach the new magic plateau of $100 million in ticket sales. 

   Today 43-year-old Mr. Lucas has come full circle, working in London and at his base in northern California on a top-secret $30 million-plus fantasy film that has been bought by MGM's Alan Ladd Jr., the man who believed in Mr. Lucas a decade ago when he was at 20th Century-Fox. 

   This time the film is "Willow," an adventure-fantasy set in a mythical place 4,500 years ago. 
Ron Howard ("Splash," "Cocoon") is directing. 
Mr. Lucas is also busy as executive producer of "Tucker: A Man and His Dream." 
Francis Coppola is directing this tale of an idealist who takes on a bureaucracy. 

   Mr. Lucas is clearly back in the movie business, after two years spent finishing an idyllic office and post-production complex called Skywalker Ranch in Marin County, near San Francisco. 
He is also celebrating an important anniversary. 
Or rather his public is celebrating it for him. 

   "Star Wars" opened May 25, 1977, and fans will flock to a three-day convention in Los Angeles that starts tomorrow, marking what the press kit calls "the first ten years." 

   Does that imply that there definitely will be further chapters in the "Star Wars" saga as originally promised? 
It is THE question for all fans, and Mr. Lucas's response to this one was disappointing only in its casual tone. 
"Oh sure, eventually," he said in a rare telephone interview. 
"Right now there are too many other things I'm more interested in, but there will be more; it's just a matter of when. 

   "Mostly I make movies that I'm personally interested in. 'Star Wars' gave me a lot of confidence that my ideas had validity for a larger audience. 
I also learned a lot of techniques and storytelling ideas that have since served me well." 
They didn't help him much with "Howard the Duck," but that's another story. 

   As he describes it, his creative process sounds mostly like surrender to a mental prison break. 
"Little images just keep going around until I can't keep them in my head and have to push them out the door," he said. 
In the case of "Star Wars," however, he admits to a deliberate attempt at myth-making, undertaken, apparently, as a form of narrative psychotherapy for teen-agers: "I think tried-and-true stories with an appropriate psychological underpinning are valuable to young people, especially in this day and age when there isn't a lot of emotional reinforcement going on." 

   Hearing that, a fan feels safe wondering out loud if it doesn't mean something that Luke, the hero of "Star Wars," sounds suspiciously like a double of his creator. 
Or that the saga takes an almost Freudian interest in Luke's father. 
He's portrayed as a decent man turned evil who turns decent again at the end. 

   Mr. Lucas objects to such psychologizing. 
"Analyzing 'Star Wars' is like trying to analyze a rose," he said. 
"Just enjoy it for what it is." 

   And leave him alone. 
Mr. Lucas doesn't think it's right that he's the target for so much public attention: "I'm not a politician running for president. 
I'm not a movie star. 
I'm a businessman. 
And when I went into this business, directors were fairly anonymous people. 
Now I have to work hard at having a private life." 

   He will concede, however, that success has some good points, such as wealth and lots of open doors. 
Mr. Lucas can pretty much do his own thing without truckling to the traditional Hollywood studio system he disdains for its worship of deal making over film making and its focus on the bottom line. 
But the growing clout of smaller independent companies such as those of Mr. Howard or his own Lucasfilm Ltd. gives Mr. Lucas some hope that more film makers today will be able to take risks and control their own destinies. 

   And that's the real- and reel-life story behind "Tucker," a movie that Mr. Coppola -- plagued by financial difficulties stemming from some grandiose failures as a director and as the owner of Zoetrope Studio -- has been trying to make for a decade. 
"It's sort of 'American Graffiti' meets 'The Godfather,'" Mr. Lucas chuckles. 
The film revolves around an innovative auto designer, Preston Tucker, who tries to buck the system. 

   "It's the life of an entrepreneur and the fate of creativity in a modern, financially oriented America," Mr. Lucas says, warming to the subject. 
"It's about what happens to a society when it grows old and tries to keep the status quo instead of letting its more-creative instincts take over." 
Although "Tucker" is set in the 1940s, Mr. Lucas makes it clear he thinks the film's subject is current -- and quite personal. 

   "It's also about how you take a dream and carry it through to reality," he said, "and what you're up against. 
The people in it come up with interesting, creative ideas that are important and relevant to the world we live in -- but they're not listened to, and the ideas are stifled from the top. 
That sounds like the business both Francis and I are in." 
True to life -- Mr. Lucas's that is -- the hero of "Tucker" triumphs. 

   ---
   Mr. Sansweet is the Journal's Los Angeles bureau chief. 
He recently enlarged his home to hold his collection of "Star Wars" memorabilia. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
