ID: 195	RANK: 93	SCORE: 5.118407
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870707-0100 </DOCNO>
<HL> Movie Buffs Line Up
For a 'Socko' Course
On the New Releases
---
Students Not Only See Films
But Also Meet the Stars
And Hear Richard Brown
---
By Ellen Graham
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The rest of academe should have it so good. 

   Richard Brown's adult-education classes at the New School for Social Research bring in 1,000 students a term. 
To get front-row seats, students line up two hours before class. 
Some, like Elsie Bennett, attend every course Mr. Brown teaches -- fall, spring and summer -- to the point, she says, "that it runs your life." 
Others drive in from distant points in New Jersey or Pennsylvania. 
One even commutes by air each week from her home near Syracuse, N.Y. 

   Mr. Brown teaches film, but not by rehashing grainy old classics, most of which bore him. 
Instead, he offers glitz: screenings of new pictures before they open and interviews with their stars and directors. 
This hybrid of entertainment and education is the brainchild of an academic who knows his marketplace. 

   "My class is an elective purchase," says the 44-year-old Mr. Brown. 
"New Yorkers have endless choices of what to do with their time. 
So I have to deliver socko every week." 

   Socko means booking the best new releases, offered gratis by the studios in the hopes of building favorable "word of mouth." 
It means coaxing people like Warren Beatty and Peter Ustinov to let down their hair in gently probing interviews. 
And, in no small measure, it is tied up with Mr. Brown's own on-stage persona. 

   Once each term, Mr. Brown appears solo, sans notes or guest stars. 
Short and compact, with wiry, unruly hair and piercing dark eyes, he paces the stage, spewing out a stream of pungent, often facetious free associations that suggest why comedian Mel Brooks calls him "the world's only stand-up professor." 

   He plunges into aesthetics. ("What's art and what's trash? 
How do we know? 
The New York Times tells us.") 
Movie critics. ("Siskel and Ebert -- they hate each other. 
These guys have made a career in which neither can go out on his own. 
It's like 'The Defiant Ones,' where the two convicts were chained together.") 
On he goes for two hours, reenacting movie scenes in dialect, mimicking Dr. Ruth and Mickey Mouse, even lapsing into fantasy about the childhood traumas of the New York Times movie critic. ("Here's little Vinnie Canby, eight years old, going into the fun house.") 

   There is substance beneath the shtick. 
"Movies are as close to magic as we get," Mr. Brown says later. 
"My job is to make that medium as vital, exciting and compelling as it can possibly be." 

   Richard Brown's rapture for the medium "isn't something he cranks up," says actor Cliff Robertson. 
"It's spilling over all the time. 
He can be racing for a cab, and if you ask him a question about a film, he'll stop and run up $50 on the meter giving you the answer. 
It's that kind of intensity." 

   Mr. Brown still tingles recalling last term's screening of "Gardens of Stone," directed by Francis Coppola. 
"Imagine this huge theater, every seat filled. 
In a closing shot we see the face of James Earl Jones 40 feet high -- he's HUGE! 
As the lights come up, I bring out the surprise guest. 'Ladies and gentlemen, would you give a warm welcome to . . . 
James Earl Jones!' 
Aww, it's so wonderful. 
Twelve hundred people saying, 'Of all the places I could be, this is it. 
People see this picture all over the world, but we have James Earl Jones!'" 

   Ordinarily, students see a film at a private weekend screening in a rented theater, returning to the school in midweek for Mr. Brown's interview. 
The celebrity is never announced in advance. 
As Mr. Brown comes on stage, the guest slips into the audience. 
There, "like a king moving among his subjects in disguise," as Mr. Brown puts it, the star listens to the class dissect his latest work. 

   This is not as excruciating as it sounds. 
These film buffs tend to be of "greater good will than the audience in general," says director Arthur Penn. 

   Still, prickly encounters do occur. 
When Gene Hackman visited the class, his picture "Hoosiers" was well-received, but one student named Judy quibbled with the ending. 
Later, Mr. Hackman couldn't hide his pique. 
"Judy, Judy, Judy," he said. 
"What are we going to do to please you?" 

   Such moments delight the class. 
"Someone bigger than life becomes real," says Helene Quinn, a secretary from Brooklyn. 
"Here's Gene Hackman -- vulnerable, concerned about one opinion. 
It's interesting to see how much they are like us." 

   Above all, Mr. Brown wants his students to trust their own visceral responses to film. 
He forbids them to read any movie reviews, and he insists that "what the audience brings into the theater is more important than anything the film maker puts on the screen." 

   During one class, someone brands the movie "Harry and the Hendersons" manipulative. 
Mr. Brown responds: "You pay your money to be manipulated. 
You go to 'Jaws' to be scared out of your wits. 
If you buy into a movie, you accept its blemishes." 

   For their $225-a-term tuition, Mr. Brown's students want the inside dope. 
Sure, they come to see Paul Newman and Woody Allen, but they also lap up every arcane tidbit about scripting, cinematography or post-production activity that Mr. Brown tosses them. 

   Guests, too, know what titillates the class. 
One evening, Anthony Quinn cozies up with phrases like "We're among friends here" and "I must tell you a little secret." 
He reflects on Fellini's artistic obsessions, emotes in a scene from "La Strada," tells a story about actress Anna Magnani and confides that mobster Frank Costello once offered to stake him to $1 million to make a picture. 

   On another evening, Mr. Brown asks an exhibitor "just back from Cannes" to tick off the latest box-office results for that term's films. 
The students groan when they learn that "Sweet Lorraine" has been "disappointing" and cheer when "Prick Up Your Ears" is deemed "big, very big." 
Student Anita Cohen explains, "We get a personal interest in many of the films we see. 
If the reviews are cruel, it hurts us." 

   Recognizing that "word of mouth" can make or break a picture in its first week, studios like to get a buzz going early. 
Mr. Brown's students, tilting toward middle age, are seen as an ideal audience for pictures that have little appeal to the mass teen-age market. 

   Mr. Brown, the son of a Queens, N.Y., paint-store owner, studied film making at New York University. 
Then, in 1967, he suffered a cerebral hemorrhage. 
After a craniotomy and months of rehabilitation, he says, "my passion for making movies was gone." 
He took a teaching job at NYU instead. 
On a whim, he invited his Greenwich Village neighbor Mel Brooks to address his class, and thus was born a winning formula. 
After sparring with the adult-education dean at the time -- who once balked at paying $35 to rent a limousine for Shirley MacLaine -- he left NYU for the New School in 1974. 

   Neither the New School nor Mr. Brown will disclose his earnings. 
He receives what he terms a "modest" teaching salary, plus a "production fee" based on his course tuitions. (Last year these tuitions exceeded $500,000.) 
He, in turn, covers all course expenses, such as theater rentals and full-page newspaper ads. 

   His sidelines include a cable-TV show seen by two million college students a week and an upcoming $1,900-a-person weekend seminar sponsored by American Express for platinum-card holders. 
Last summer he led a Cunard Line tour to London, for which students paid up to $3,800 each to mingle with stars aboard the Queen Elizabeth II and the Concorde. 
A 1985 series of summer film festivals at Vassar College, however, lost money. 
"Nobody believed that Cher would schlep to Poughkeepsie and live in a dorm," he says, "but she did." 
So did a host of other luminaries. 

   Just why do superstars flock, unpaid, to his classrooms? 
Partly, Cliff Robertson says, it's because "he's a defender of the faith -- a defender of film." 
Others simply welcome contact with that great void, the audience. 

   "There's almost a period of mourning when you finish a picture," Arthur Penn says. 
"You send it out into space, and it either creates a furor or dead silence. 
So it's wonderful to have Richard, who says, 'Wait a minute, something has happened here worth attending to.'" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
