ID: 195	RANK: 97	SCORE: 4.961510
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861211-0100 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Film: Real Men Invade Island, Wear Hats
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 12/11/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Shut your face, hippie," a middle-aged military man named Tom Highway growls at the talkative young man seated next to him on a bus. 

   The kid, a rap singer named Stitch Jones who wears an earring in one lobe, chortles: "There ain't been no hippies around for centuries, man." 

   Later, the two meet again, at the boot camp where young Jones (Mario Van Peebles) is one of the Marine Corps grunts Highway is supposed to whip into shape. 
But "Heartbreak Ridge," Clint Eastwood's latest film, isn't just another fictional variation on the "Marines Builds Men" slogan. 
The movie also reflects Mr. Eastwood's own ambivalence about the kind of macho heroes he's so successfully realized onscreen. 

   As Jones ably points out on the bus, Mr. Eastwood's Gunnery Sgt. Highway is a walking anachronism. 
His chest is studded with medals from Vietnam and Korea, wars his countrymen would just as soon forget. 
He spends many Saturday nights in jail-house drunk tanks, boring his cell mates with his war stories, beating up those who don't want to listen. 

   Though his muscularity is intact, Mr. Eastwood (who directed) has gone out of the way to make himself look over the hill. 
His face looks like an old boot; his voice sounds like he's gargled with gravel. 

   As always, he is a commanding screen presence, not least because of the relentless stream of rasping obscenities that mark him as an archetypal real man. 
Actually, the man talk generally is so inventively vulgar that it's funny, like listening to a bunch of eighth-grade boys spinning out of control as they try to reinvent the four-letter word. 

   Sgt. Highway is nearing retirement, so a subplot has him trying to reconcile with his ex-wife (Marsha Mason). 
Romantic action isn't Clint's forte; however, there are some amusing moments as the foulmouthed sergeant tries to woo his ex with the sociobabble he picked up from the ladies magazines he reads. 

   But in the end, this isn't a psychodrama. 
After all, Mr. Eastwood handily upends a menacing hulk within moments of the picture's opening. 
This is an Eastwood action picture, and it leads as always to a showdown. 
The battle he leads his men into is the invasion of Grenada, which serves nicely to illustrate how pathetic the "glory" of war had become. 

   ---
   "Crimes of the Heart," Beth Henley's Pulitzer Prize-winning play, has been made into a movie. 
It isn't the worst film adaptation of a play by a long shot. 
It's just not all that good. 

   Ms. Henley's play about the semi-tragic, semi-farcical MaGrath sisters was a comic and contemporary take on Southern Gothic characters, with suicides in every family closet -- that sort of thing. 
She's a clever writer who specializes in offbeat, funny dialogue that has made up for the fact that beneath the surface of her cartoonish characters there were often more cartoons. 

   The movie, directed by Bruce Beresford ("Tender Mercies," "King David"), has three stars with strong appeal: Jessica Lange, Sissy Spacek and Diane Keaton. 
Ms. Spacek, particularly, brings the sister she plays to life, at least partly because she doesn't have to fight to keep up some semblance of a Southern accent the way the others do. 
Sam Shepard, Ms. Lange's playwright-actor mate, has a brief part as one sister's old boyfriend. 
He proves that even as charming a screen personality as he is, he can be just awful. 

   Ms. Henley, who wrote the screenplay, has remained faithful to her original. 
So now, instead of developing the plot by stories that the sisters tell around the kitchen table, Ms. Henley has the sisters walk as they talk, or sit in trees and talk. 

   Ms. Henley turns life's various cruelties into jokes, some better than others. 
Her world is full of shrunken ovaries, failed careers, attempted murders, untidy deaths and, especially, quirkiness. 

   To understand the MaGrath sisters, one has only to look at the house where they grew up and where most of the movie takes place. 
It's a ramshackle Victorian affair, filled with intricately wrought banisters. 
Porches poke out at odd angles. 
The inside is fussy, lots of doilies and flowered wallpaper and canopied beds -- a hothouse atmosphere almost guaranteed to induce various degrees of emotional disturbance. 
That's more than this movie does. 

   ---
   The holiday season wouldn't be complete without a crowd-pleasing no-brains comedy. 
"Three Amigos" fits the bill. 

   The picture is an overblown hybrid of a tame "Blazing Saddles" and a Crosby-Hope road picture. 
It isn't hilarious, but it has some cute bits and engaging heroes: Steve Martin, Chevy Chase and Martin Short. 
It also has funny costumes; seriously, the Liberace-style "caballero" suits the three men wear are a surprisingly effective sight gag. 

   There is a story, too. 
The citizens of a Mexican town hounded by thugs mistakenly think the characters of a popular silent film series -- called the "Three Amigos" -- are real. 
The movie stars think it's a gig and accept, only to find they must become real-life heroes. 

   It's shtick -- and not very outrageous shtick at that -- but it has its moments, most of them having to do with a singing bush. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
