ID: 157	RANK: 21	SCORE: 5.785198
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870206-0076 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
At 82, He's Still Calling the Shots
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 02/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Hartland, Wis.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Things were not going well for the boys' basketball team from Keith Country Day School, a small, private institution in Rockford, Ill. 
Short but slow, and erratic to boot, it straggled off the court trailing University Lakes School here, 50-27, at the end of the third quarter Saturday afternoon. 

   "Gentlemen, you are missing your layups and free throws, and you're not helping one another on defense," said coach Dolph Stanley. 
"Does anyone have a suggestion?" 

   When none was proffered, the coach could only shrug. 
"Well, persevere," he said. 
"Persevere." 

   Perseverance is a subject about which Stanley could write a book. 
At age 82, white-haired and rugged, he may not be the nation's oldest active basketball coach, but he surely is close. 

   Moreover, he is one of the winningest coaches ever on the high school and college level. 
Over 52 seasons, his teams at a half-dozen Illinois high schools and at Beloit College, in Beloit, Wis., have posted 952 official victories. 
The total would be 977, but 25 wins by his 1963 team at Auburn High in Rockford were forfeited retroactively when it was discovered that it used an overage player. 

   The forfeit ruling hung on whether a "4" could be discerned on the lad's mangled Arkansas birth certificate: His parents swore he was born on Dec. 24, but the document seemed to read Dec. 2, which put the player on the wrong side of a state eligibility cutoff date. 
"If you held it up to the light, you could see the '4,' " Stanley maintains. 

   Auburn High forgave Stanley the episode (it named its gym after him when he was forced to leave in 1970 on reaching the then-mandatory retirement age of 65), but the ruling still grates because it might keep him from posting 1,000 career victories, something achieved by only a handful of coaches in the sport. 
Academics-conscious Keith has just 30 boys in its high-school division, and while Stanley says they are good kids, he reckons he might have to coach there until he is 100 before accumulating 48 more wins. 

   Upon reflection, though, he allows that he can afford to be generous on the issue. 
"If you include all the freshman, junior varsity and all-star games I've coached, I probably have 2,000 victories," he says. 
"I'd say that's enough for any man." 

   Many of those wins came on a grander stage than that offered by the Southern Wisconsin and Illinois Small Schools (SWISS) Conference in which his present team plays. 
He is the only coach in Illinois history to have taken teams from five different schools to the round of 16 in the state prep tourney, and his 1944 Taylorville squad posted a record 45-0 mark in winning it. 
That win total probably will never be topped, because schools aren't allowed to play that many games anymore. 

   Stanley coached at Beloit College from 1945 through 1957, winning 238 of 295. 
His 1951 team was the smallest school ever to appear in the National Invitational Tournament, then the nation's premier college-hoops event. 
Beloit was so strong during the Stanley era that it was voted out of its conference, so it scheduled, and beat, the likes of DePaul, Loyola, Arizona and Brigham Young. 

   Stanley was athletics director at Drake University in 1958 and '59, a long-enough period to convince him that he preferred coaching to fund raising. 
He coached for 10 years at Auburn High, and, when the school board retired him, he went across town to coach Boylan Catholic High for 10 years. 
Two years of fitful retirement and he was ready to take the part-time coaching job at Keith. 

   In his middle years, Stanley received bids to pilot such big-time places as Michigan, Minnesota, Iowa State and Army. 
He turned them down, and still puzzles over why. 
"It wasn't because I was scared, or, at least, I don't think it was," he says. 
"I guess I wanted to really coach, not recruit and do all the other things big-school men do. 

   "When you're in the high schools and small colleges, you have to deal with the players you get, so you have to be flexible. 
I guess I've taught every offensive and defensive system known to man," he goes on. 
"I've been around long enough to know that there's not much new in basketball. 
A lot of people give John Wooden from UCLA credit for inventing the zone-press defense, but I used it in 1936 at Mt. Pulaski High School. 
Same with that passing offense Bobby Knight uses at Indiana. 
My Taylor ville teams whipped the ball around as good as his do. 

   "I believe that speed is what makes basketball worth watching and playing, and I've always resented the big boys taking over. 
I think we'd have twice the game we do now if someone'd figure out a way to get rid of the backboard. 
Maybe I'd feel different if I'd ever had a good big man, but, believe it or not, I never did. 
Every really tall boy I coached was slow as mud. 
I had one 6-11 kid at Beloit who had promise, but he fell in love and broke his toe the same week. 
Never saw him again." 

   Stanley admits he's not the coach he used to be, if only because he no longer can get out on the floor and demonstrate techniques. 
"You can't tell kids much. 
You've got to show them," he notes. 
He has been on crutches for two weeks now because he was knocked down by a player he was trying to instruct. 
"I was holding him to teach him the stop-and-go, but he took off too soon," the coach says. 

   But despite such setbacks, and just 27 wins in five years (the team is 3-13 this season), Stanley feels he is doing some of his best coaching at Keith. 
The team had just three members when he came. 
It suits up 13 now, unless a school play or ski trip intrudes. 
"We've gone from the gym-class level to junior varsity," Stanley says. 
"At least, when I tell 'em to press now, they know what I mean." 

   And, indeed, the Keith players, none taller than 6-feet-2 ("and he's only that tall because he's got a long neck," Stanley says), did persevere in the fourth quarter against University Lakes and bring the final score to a respectable 55-46. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
