ID: 157	RANK: 24	SCORE: 5.380228
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870827-0028 </DOCNO>
<HL> Without Instruction
Or Effort, You, Too,
Can Be a Sports Star
---
Custom-Made Audio Tapes
Put Fans in Hero Roles;
Laxalt Wins Wimbledon
---
By Naomi S. Travers
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Did you hear about the time President Reagan played shortstop for the Chicago Cubs in a game with the New York Yankees and knocked the ball out of the park in the ninth inning to win the game? 

   Ronald Reagan heard all about it -- on an audio tape presented to him in 1985 by his friend Paul Laxalt, then a senator from Nevada. 

   The tape, a get-well gift, was created by Nat Albright, the proprietor of Fantasy Tapes in Arlington, Va. 
Using recorded sounds such as roaring crowds and cracks of the bat, Mr. Albright did the play-by-play from a script he wrote. 
The resulting cassette sounds like a radio broadcast of an authentic sporting event. 

   Mr. Laxalt ordered the gift for the president after his staff gave him a tape in which he defeated John McEnroe to win the Wimbledon tennis championship. 
That heady experience was also created by Mr. Albright, who explains the appeal a fantasy-sports tape has for presidents, senators and the not-so-celebrated. 
"It allows you to be the star," he says. 

   He adds: "For those who dreamed about playing at the Masters, driving a car in the Indy 500 or playing center court at Wimbledon, they can live the dream with a fantasy-sports tape." 

   Another Washington-area company, Hall of Fame Tapes Inc. of Bethesda, Md., reports brisk demand for similar tapes from business people and others. 
David Landau, a recruiter for a Washington law firm, and Richard Stark, a Roy Rogers franchise manager, started making the tapes out of their love of sports and, Mr. Landau says, because they saw a "tremendous market opportunity" for the items. 
The tapes are sold at prices that range between $50 and $70, depending on how many "stars" are featured on the tape and other extras. 

   Mr. Albright, who began professional sports announcing for the St. Louis Cardinals in 1948 and later announced for the Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers, has been creating sports-fantasy tapes since 1982. 
Since then, he has produced tapes for notables such as former House Speaker Thomas P. "Tip" O'Neill, cartoonist Gary Trudeau and director-actor Ron Howard. 

   "Trudeau's sister ordered a tape for him. 
He played quarterback for the {Washington} Redskins. 
Tip O'Neill played baseball with the Boston Red Sox. 
Ron Howard played second base for the Los Angeles Dodgers {and} flew all the way out here from California to pick the tape up," Mr. Albright says. 

   Mr. Albright has made "about three or four thousand" tapes since 1982, he says, inventing fictitious horse races, boxing matches and basketball games. 
He has an engineering sound room that can produce noises like a revving race-car engine, a shot-clock buzzer at a basketball game and a crowd's oohs and ahs. 

   Hall of Fame specializes in tapes for companies and corporations to kick off conferences, board meetings and sales presentations. 
"In those specialty sports tapes, we man an entire team with company personnel and typically feature the CEO scoring the game-winning basket or hitting the dramatic ninth-inning home run," says Mr. Landau. 
Some of these companies have included Union Carbide Corp. and General Electric Co. 

   Mr. Landau and Mr. Stark got the idea for the tapes from the high prices that fans were paying to play at camps with retired baseball stars. 
The partners, who have been friends since the first grade, handle the business end of the operation and do some creative scriptwriting, but most of the play-by-play is left to Robert Workman, a professional announcer. 

   A Hall of Fame tape made for Robert Abney, a pediatrician from Jackson, Miss., playing a chip shot in the Masters golf tournament went like this: 

   "The chip is away. . . . 
It looks right on target. . . . 
It has a chance. . . . 
Yes! . . . 
It's in the cup. . . . 
I don't believe it! . . . 
Bob Abney sinks a 30-foot chip shot . . . and is the 1987 Masters champion. . . . 
An amateur, born July 24, 1938, {he} walks over to accept congratulations from a stunned Larry Mize. . . . 
Mize must be very disappointed, but today belongs to Dr. Abney, winner of the green jacket by one stroke over a real pro." 

   In another Hall of Fame tape, Pierre Salinger of ABC News substituted for superstar quarterback Dan Fouts in a fictitious pro-football title game won by the San Diego Chargers. 
The tape was a gift to Mr. Salinger from his son, Steven. 

   "He freaked out," the younger Mr. Salinger says. 
"He is a big Chargers fan. 
He used to own part of the team. 
I'm a big Raiders fan, and that's the team the Chargers played. 
Fouts was injured, and Dad stepped in to throw a last-minute touchdown, recovered the on-side kick and on a halfback option, ran the ball in for another touchdown." 

   Howard Schllosberg, a New York retailing executive, has done a great deal for the fantasy-tapes industry. 
"I've purchased over 100 tapes. 
I ordered a lot of them around Christmas," says Mr. Schllosberg. 

   Most of Mr. Schllosberg's friends who receive tapes want to give other tapes as gifts to their friends. 
"I've had about 20 people who wanted to order tapes," he says. 
One of the orders was destined as a gift for Ivan Lendl and his manager; it featured the tennis star losing to the manager. 

   Creative taping has turned David Hartman, former "Good Morning America" co-host, into the heavyweight champion of the world and has allowed William Leonard, former president of CBS News, to lead the Redskins to Super Bowl glory. 
In another memorable audio fantasy, the chairman of I. Magnin Department Stores hit a homer in the ninth to win the World Series for the New York Yankees. 

   Harvey Freeman, a New York attorney for the Trump organization, received as a gift a tape on which he teamed up with Willis Reed and Walt Frazier to lead the New York Knicks to the 1970 National Basketball Association championship over the Los Angeles Lakers. 

   "It was a fulfillment of a fantasy I have had for a while," Mr. Freeman says. 
"It was a delightful gift for someone who has only played basketball on the playgrounds as a child." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
