ID: 157	RANK: 29	SCORE: 5.291798
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880329-0131 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports: Bloody Kansas Clash on Road to Missouri </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> PONTIAC, Mich.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The unusual has come to be regarded as typical in the NCAA basketball tournament, so it flabbergasted few that the collegiate championship of the state of Kansas was played out here Sunday before 31,000 witnesses who half-filled a vast, silver-domed stadium built for football. 

   Kansas vs. 
Kansas State it was, for the fourth time this season and the 214th since Dr. Naismith, the game's inventor, first hung out the old peach basket. 
He used to coach at Kansas, you know, or maybe you didn't. 
Anyway, Kansas, which had placed third in the recent Big Eight conference race, won the tourney's Midwest regional final over State, 71-58, to qualify for next weekend's Final Four in Kansas City. 
That's in Missouri (you knew that), but it's close enough to home to make 'em the home team. 

   Kansas State had placed second in the Big Eight and had beaten its ancient sparring partner by 15 points a couple of weeks ago, but the turnaround seemed routine to Kansas coach Larry Brown. 
"Losing last time made us want to redeem ourselves. 
I think it helped," he said. 
I guess you have to be a coach to understand that. 

   To be sure, the experts who planted the regional's seeds foresaw a different outcome. 
They seeded Purdue, the Big 10 champ, No. 1 and Pitt, the Big East winner, No. 2. (K State was seeded fourth and Kansas sixth.) 
But Pitt was the pits against Vanderbilt in the second round, and K State upset Purdue in Friday night's semis just after Kansas beat Vandy. 
If those two results had been reversed, we'd have seen Purdue face Perdue, the latter being the surname of Vandy's center, Will. 
Will's a senior, so headline writers never will get a crack at that one. 

   One well might ask how a state like Kansas, which contains about 1% of the U.S. population, got 25% of the quarter-finalists in the annual college hoops classic. 
The answer is the jet airplane. 
Kansas's roster contains players from Los Angeles, Oakland and Santa Monica, Calif.; Washington; Houston; and Greensboro, N.C., among other places. 
State's matriculants hail from cities as distant as Sao Paulo, Brazil. 

   The State star, husky forward Mitch Richmond (try saying that three times fast), is from Ft. 
Lauderdale, Fla., by way of a community college in Moberly, Mo. 
"Having lived in Moberly helped me appreciate Manhattan," he said in explanation of his college choice. 
The Manhattan in question, of course, is in Kansas, not the island off New Jersey. 

   The Kansas star is Danny Manning, formerly of Greensboro, N.C. Coach Brown wanted him so badly he hired Danny's dad, Ed, as an assistant coach a year before he signed the son. 
The 6-foot-10 Danny, a senior, has been a Manning among boys in his four years at Lawrence, Kan., averaging almost 20 points a game to set the Big Eight career scoring record. 
State's tenacious zone defense guarded him front, back and sides on Sunday, but it couldn't get on top of him and he put in his usual 20 to lead all scorers. 

   Manning's excellence is Kansas's "given," however, and it was the effort of two other players, Milt Newton and Scooter Barry, that keyed the win. 
Newton, a native of the Virgin Islands and a resident of Washington, is a skinny forward whose previous main distinction was that he is the only athletic Newton who isn't nicknamed "Fig." 
He didn't get a chance to really strut his stuff until an injury to another player opened a lineup spot in the season's ninth game. 

   On Sunday, Newton scored 18 points and added a game-high nine rebounds and seven assists. 
More importantly, his defense bugged Richmond into an 11-point afternoon, less than half his season's average of 22.9. 

   As State's zone sagged on Manning in the late going, it was Newton who got the big baskets. 
A couple of three-pointers by him helped his team pull from even to a 54-46 lead between the 10- and seven-minutes-to-go marks, and with three minutes left and State threatening to make it close again, he rebounded a missed free throw and banked in a 10-footer to start a clinching, eight-point run. 

   "I was tickled to see Newton put up that shot. 
I was scared he'd pass it out and let them run the 45-second clock," said State coach Lon Kruger. 
"I was gonna yell at him" for shooting, agreed Brown. 
But it went in, muting the criticism. 
"It's a shot I make all the time," said Newton in smiling innocence. 

   Barry is an equally interesting character. 
His father is Rick, the NBA Hall of Famer, but Scooter has mostly warmed the bench in college, triggering unflattering comparisons. 
He admits these used to bother him, and caused him to do things like shoot his free throws one-handed instead of with his dad's familiar underhand scoop in order to dampen the scent. 

   But the 21-year-old junior guard says that with maturity has come a greater appreciation of his own talents and limitations, and more success on court. 
On Sunday, he scored 15 points, five more than his previous career high, including a three-pointer at the first-half buzzer that cut State's lead to two, and some key points down the stretch. 
"I should have played him more earlier in the season," said his coach in a rare compliment. 

   Brown took Kansas to the Final Four in 1986, where it was eliminated in the semis. 
He says this year's trip with a team with 11 losses and 25 wins is sweeter. 
"That year we had the people to win it all, and I was disappointed we didn't. 
Early this season, when we were 12-and-8, I had no inkling we'd be going again. 
I thought we'd be lucky to host an NIT game." 

   For Richmond, unsung hero of an equally unsung team, the loss was disappointing in more ways than one. 
Newspeople had struggled all season with his name, calling him things like "Rich Mitchman." 
When he was named to the all-tourney team here, it was as "Milt" Richmond, perhaps in confusion with his Kansas tormentor. 

   Don't worry about the young man's future, though. 
Ex-pro Bob Lanier says he'll eat his shoes if Richmond doesn't make it in the NBA, and that's saying a mouthful. 
Lanier wears a size 19. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
