ID: 157	RANK: 3	SCORE: 10.228005
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870512-0082 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Sports: 'All-Short' Basketball
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 05/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The National Basketball Association playoffs are in full swing, a fact that delights some but produces ennui in others. 
The yawners say it's a waste to tune in an NBA game until the last two minutes, or that even tuning in before June is a waste. 

   Still others believe that it isn't just the NBA's brand of hoops that's lacking, but modern basketball in general. 
Members of this faction hold that the players have outgrown the facilities and turned Dr. Naismith's noble invention into a track meet for giraffes. 
They would like to raise the baskets, enlarge the court and trim the number of contestants to four from five. 

   I must say that I do not count myself among basketball's critics. 
Knocking the players for being too tall, too swift and too agile reminds me of the character in the movie "Amadeus" who faulted a Mozart tune for having too many notes. 
Nevertheless, I feel obliged to pass along the news that a new professional basketball league is being planned that will answer at least one of the malcontents' beefs. 
No player loftier than 6-foot-4-inches tall will be allowed to perform. 

   The league has been dubbed the International Basketball Association. 
At the moment, it is mainly a gleam in the eyes of a handful of individuals who have yet to purchase a basketball. 
The backgrounds of some of them, however, indicate that they may own several one day soon. 

   The league's chairman is Ben Hatskin, a resident of Winnipeg, Manitoba, who owned the Winnipeg Jets in the old World Hockey Association. 
His signing of Bobby Hull away from the Chicago Blackhawks gave that loop the shot it needed to rival and, later, merge into the National Hockey League. 

   The guy who'll run the league is Dennis Murphy, who helped start the WHA, American Basketball Association and Team Tennis. 
In charge of basketball operations when there are some, and public relations in the meantime, is Bob Cousy, the old Boston Celtics' flash. 
Some say basketball hasn't been the same since the 6-foot-1-inch Cooz hung it up back in '63. 

   Cousy now broadcasts Celtics games, and says he has no enmity for the established circuit. 
"Basketball's a great sport and the NBA's a great league," says he. 
"We see ourselves existing alongside the NBA, not competing with it. 
Kind of like a little brother, if you know what I mean." 

   The IBA's founders say that the size of the players won't be the only novelty of their enterprise. 
They are aiming for a summer schedule of 50 to 60 games beginning in 1988, there will be a salary cap of $600,000 on each team's roster of 10 or 11 players, and the "International" in their name will be no mere curtsy to our immediate neighbor to the north. 

   According to Murphy, the IBA plans to promote international competition on two fronts. 
He says the league will petition the International Olympic Committee to begin staging competitions in a 6-foot-4-and-under division in addition to the open-to-all one it now maintains. 
He points out, with justice, that boxing and wrestling are conducted by weight class. 

   The IBA has moved on its own to internationalize the sport by agreeing to meet a team from the Philippines in a series in Manila next September. 
It will hold tryout camps in Los Angeles, Houston, Chicago and New York this summer to pick a 10-man All-Short team to make that trip. 
Murphy hopes this will be the first of a broader series of contests matching teams from various countries in what eventually would become a sort of World Cup of Short Basketball, in which his league would represent the U.S. 

   "Basketball is the No. 2 sport in popularity -- behind soccer -- in Europe, Latin America and Asia, and the game in those places is quickly reaching U.S. standards," he says. 
"If you equalize for height, you'd have good competition right off the bat." 

   The nearer-term prospects for the IBA will depend on getting a domestic league off the ground (but not too far), and Murphy says that strides have been made in that direction. 
He says that groups from seven localities -- New York, Chicago, Boston, Winnipeg, Los Angeles, Orange County, Calif., and Fresno, Calif. -- have ponied up $25,000 each for the right to form IBA teams. 
The plan is to sell five more franchises at $100,000 each for an inaugural-season circuit of 12 squads. 
By contrast, the 23-team NBA just peddled four new franchises for $32.5 million apiece. 

   Getting players will be no problem, the league's founders believe. 
They point out that our nation's colleges excel in producing highly qualified basketballers, many in the 6-4-or-under class, and that the existing domestic professional loops -- the NBA and minor-league Continental Basketball Association -- employ just a fraction of the available talent. 

   "The best of the shorter players, like {6-foot-2-inch} Steve Alford of Indiana, will still sign with the NBA, but that'll leave plenty for us," says Cousy. 
"Guys like {5-foot-11-inch} Billy Donovan of Providence or {5-foot-3-inch} Muggsy Bogues of Wake Forest would be perfect for our league, and we'd showcase them best because they wouldn't be playing against giants." 

   The IBA would further distinguish itself from the NBA by using a 30-second shot clock to the NBA's 24 seconds, allowing five timeouts a game to the NBA's nine (hurrah!) and letting players whip the ball into play themselves after back-court violations instead of waiting for a referee to bless the sphere (double hurrah!). 

   Mostly, though, the IBA is banking on the box-office appeal of normal-size players. 
"Who does the average-sized person identify with? 
Another average-sized person, of course," avers founder Murphy. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
