ID: 157	RANK: 45	SCORE: 4.886333
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880226-0062 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sports (A Special Report): Doing It --- Taking It to the Hoop: Pickup Basketball Is a World of Its Own, Where Players Can Feel at Home on Any Court </HL>
<AUTHOR> Rick Wartzman </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   IT'S LUNCH TIME AT the downtown YMCA in Pittsburgh. 
Yet the only thing to eat is a little leather, should you happen to head to the hoop a tad too imperiously. 

   And what can you do about it? 
Nothing, except weave back through the traffic and, as brazenly as before, put the ball up again. 
"In pickup basketball, my theory is there's never a bad shot," explains David White, a 32-year-old local attorney who routinely travels between the courtroom and the court. 
"It's whatever you want to do, whatever you can do." 

   Every day, of course, this sort of free spirit is displayed from coast to coast as thousands of people, attracted to the laissez-faire nature of pickup basketball, fulfill athletic fantasies by shooting buckets. 

   The pickup game itself takes on various forms. 
Three-on-three, half-court, is perhaps most popular because it allows everyone to get involved, and it is easier to get six players together than 10. 
True fanatics, though, are always looking for a full-court, five-on-five matchup. 

   At the Fonde Recreation Center in Houston -- recognized by cognoscenti as the national hot spot for pickup ball -- six half-court games are played simultaneously. 
But for two hours each morning, only full-court action is allowed. 
"If the players act real nice," says Joyce Byrd, manager of the gym, "we'll sometimes extend that." 

   Weaker players at Fonde, in sharp contrast to the scene in Pittsburgh, are pushed onto one court at the south end of the center, away from view. 
"We just don't want them to get hurt," Ms. Byrd says. 
"But even for them, it's all about being competitive." 

   So if you lack the prowess, that's all right. 
Everyone who plays this game is entitled to a few delusions of grandeur (and, if you're short, maybe a delusion of glandular). 
One good shot makes up for several bad ones. 

   Pickup basketball has its own jargon that, like jazz music, is very expressive. 
A ball isn't just a ball; it's a pill or a rock. 
A pass is a dish. 
A blocked shot is a wipe, swat or face job. 
A dunk shot (never an issue for those who don't leap very well) has lots of names, including funk-dunk, punk-dunk, slam, bam, ram, tomahawk and showtime. 

   The parlance of pickup, moreover, contributes to a distinct subculture, able to unite folks who normally wouldn't mix at all. 
"It breaks down a lot of barriers," says Julius Erving, one of the leading scorers, and soarers, in professional basketball history. 
He says his own pickup career is full of fine memories: "I've even played overseas with people who couldn't speak English. 
But they could speak basketball." 

   Nancy Lieberman, the former Olympian, maintains that pickup ball allowed her to enter a world that would have otherwise remained open only to men. 
"I used to take the train up to Harlem by myself," she says. 
"Basketball made me fearless." 

   Sports sociologist Jim Pitts, himself a voracious rebounder at Northwestern University 20 years ago, puts it this way: "You can relate to people easily on the basketball court, something the stratification of the marketplace makes difficult. 
If you're an accountant, you can play with other accountants, but you can also play with the janitor in the building." 

   The Pittsburgh Y offers a cross-section of society. 
Every day about noon, three dozen men -- some age 25, others more than twice that -- gather. 
Among them are corporate managers and lawyers. 
But there are others, too: students, blue-collar types and an occasional drifter. 
Most competed in high school. 
A few took their games to college. 

   These days, some participate in organized leagues as well, but even they prefer the spontaneity of the pickup game and the camaraderie it brings. 
"It's pretty fierce at times, but I feel like I got a lot of friends out here," says a sweat-soaked attorney of 46 years named Jack Cherkin. 
Obsessed like most of those at the Y, he plays four or five days a week. 

   The action is fast, five-on-five. 
The first team to score seven buckets -- a low number so a lot of people get a chance to play -- wins and stays on the floor. 
The losers give way to a new squad. 

   Nobody goes down easily, though. 
Epithets, as well as bodies, have been known to fly in the pursuit of victory. 
"The rules are limited, so it's kind of the honor system," says Paul Mickey, a Y regular who stands 6 feet 10 inches tall. 
He played for Penn State in the mid-1960s. 

   Actually, this court isn't nearly as rough-and-tumble as some. 
Lots of the guys here attempt long-range jump shots, or "the J," whereas in more downtrodden parts of the inner city, respect is earned solely by sinking an inside basket through a thicket of arms and torsos. 

   Court etiquette varies from gym to gym, from city to city and, especially, from state to state. 
Consider, for instance, Indiana, just about the only place in the country where people don't play a version of half-court basketball called "make it, take it." 

   Under those rules, the team that scores will immediately get the ball on offense again. 
But in Hoosier Land, the purity of the contest is held in such high regard that the team that scores will turn around and play defense. 

   "It's a very Calvinist work ethic in Indiana," says Alexander Wolff, co-author of "The Back-In-Your-Face Guide to Pick-Up Basketball." 
California, he adds, is the lone spot where players observe the three-seconds rule, which limits the amount of time you can camp out under the basket. 
Mr. Wolff surmises: "People live on the fault-line out there, and maybe they're used to being protective of their real estate." 

   Still, no matter where the rim hangs -- on the side of the country barn or in the middle of the city park -- enough universal rules exist to make a player feel at home anywhere. 
For example, pickup ball everywhere is marked by its frenetic pace. 

   And today is no exception. 
A player drives toward the basket, pulls up for the shot, maneuvers around the defender and waits for the sibilant sound: whoosh. 
Never mind that these guys are mostly has-beens, and a few might even be described as never-weres. 

   This game is about dreaming. 
And for someone to head back to the office, knowing he threw in a hanging, double-pump jumper, is enough to make him feel like king of the court. 

   ---
   Mr. Wartzman is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's bureau in Pittsburgh, where he enjoys shooting hoops. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
