ID: 157	RANK: 46	SCORE: 4.880237
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911210-0071
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911210-0071.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Retailing:
   As Stores Scrimp More and Order Less,
   Suppliers Take On Greater Risks, Costs
   ----
   By Dana Milbank
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
12/10/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   BOL CWLD GLW HUF RBD X.LVI
</CO>
<MS>
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
DIVERSIFIED TECHNOLOGY (DTC)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
NON-DURABLE HOUSEWARE PRODUCTS (HPN)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)
SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
LEISURE TIME SERVICES AND PRODUCTS (REQ)
ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)
</IN>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
MASSACHUSETTS (MA)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
OHIO (OH)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
UNITED STATES (US)
</RE>
<LP>
   If Santa treated his elves the way retailers have been
handling their suppliers this Christmas, he would likely face
a major revolt.
   Haunted by the huge markdowns of Christmases past,
department and specialty stores are keeping tight control of
inventories and forcing suppliers to swallow more risks and
costs.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Retailers are delaying some orders, canceling or refusing
others at the last minute and demanding more rapid delivery
on those orders they do place. This forces manufacturers to
swell their own inventories, speed up production cycles and
stick to traditional products -- or risk losing business.
   "Retailers are eager to err on the side of scarcity this
time, and it clearly is hurting manufacturers, particularly
at a time when sales are dropping off," says Kurt Barnard, a
retail-industry consultant and president of Retail Marketing
Report.
   Children's Palace/Child World Inc. toy stores, for
example, told suppliers last June that it would stretch some
Christmas ordering from August to December and also asked
vendors to hold merchandise without any promise of an order.
Harwood Cos., a boys' and men's clothing maker, says one
customer threatened to fine it up to $100 for a mislabeled $7
garment.
   Few can blame retailers for such tactics: Their cash flows
improve, they save interest and storage costs and also avoid
big markdowns in January. In September, U.S. retailers'
inventory-to-sales ratio was 1.57, according to the Commerce
Department, down from 1.60 for September 1989 and 1.59 in
September 1990.
   But the retailers' cost cutting often simply means higher
expenses for suppliers. They must stockpile inventory so they
can fill orders suddenly, adding to their interest costs.
"Retailers know that if they need merchandise, they can
likely order it for immediate delivery," says Deborah
Bronston, who follows the apparel industry for Prudential
Securities.
   Harwood's chief executive Michael Rothbaum calls some of
this behavior "predatory." He says customers now place orders
but don't confirm them until shortly before shipment, giving
them room to wiggle out of the deal. Even though Harwood has
cut its manufacturing process to hours from weeks, the
company still finds itself badgering retailers to confirm
orders and then scrambling to fill them quickly. "Retailers
want to be able to say that it wasn't an order in the first
place if {the item} doesn't take off" in the stores, says Mr.
Rothbaum.
   Worse, he adds, is the proliferation of "charge-back"
policies that allow retailers to pay the manufacturer less or
return goods for relatively minor problems, such as placing
the packing slip on the wrong part of the box. "I could ship
$50,000 worth of merchandise and wind up owing $50,000," Mr.
Rothbaum says.
   Manufacturers have little leverage in resisting retailers;
and small manufacturers in particular don't dare put up a
fight, because retailers have been steadfastly pruning their
supplier lists. "It takes a level of predictability out of
the business," says Prudential Securities' Ms. Bronston. "But
that's the new modus operandi; and if they can't {adapt},
they'll get less business."
   While antagonism between retailer and vendor is nothing
new, tough times in retailing and the sluggish economy have
exacerbated the situation. In clothing -- which has the most
inventory risk because of fickle tastes and rapidly changing
fashions -- the number of "at-once" orders has accelerated in
recent months. That partially explains the doubling in
apparel makers' inventories from last year. "The problems
become more acute at Christmas," when activity peaks, says
Carl Steidtmann, chief economist for Price Waterhouse's
Management Horizons unit.
   Even for the manufacturers, some of the new pressure is
good medicine. It forces them to reduce their own costs by
speeding production cycles and honing their just-in-time
inventory techniques. The faster response time also helps
American-made goods beat imports, which can't be delivered as
promptly without stockpiling.
   The pressure has also fostered new partnerships between
retailer and manufacturer to reduce overall costs. Levi
Strauss &amp; Co. now offers a "LeviLink" computer system that
automatically replenishes retailers' inventories based on
Levi's market studies, without receiving an order. The
company has also adopted a "quick response" arrangement with
its own suppliers that has cut its production time for a
typical pair of jeans to 22 days from 44.
   Like many manufacturers, Wooster, Ohio's Rubbermaid Inc.
keeps track of its retail customers' inventories with a
computer hookup to the retailer's point-of-sale data. This,
says Rubbermaid President Wolf Schmidt, "avoids dead periods"
between customer orders and shipments. "There's no question
{retailers are} more aggressive in lowering their inventory,"
Mr. Schmidt says, "but we're trying to more closely manage
our own inventory. If you stand around and yell `victim,'
sure enough you'll be a victim."
   Makers of basic goods such as jeans, T-shirts and
sweatshirts have benefited from retailers' reluctance to
gamble on new products this season. Huffy Corp., which makes
low-cost bicycles, basketball backboards and other goods that
don't go out of fashion quickly, says its customers have been
ordering more this year in hopes of a strong Christmas.
   Retailers' caution has restrained manufacturers'
product-development efforts. "Retailers are going with
conservative designs: tried-and-true products with good
margins," says a spokesman for Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., the maker
of Ray-Ban sunglasses.
   Even manufacturers who say their products are selling well
have felt the pressure. "We have to overproduce," says a
spokesman for Corning Inc.'s consumer-products unit, which
makes dishware and cooking equipment. "The burden falls back
to the manufacturer." Earlier in the Christmas season,
Corning feared that even if its products sold out, retailers
might not reorder because they preferred to exhaust
inventories of other products; now Corning says the retailers
reordered anyway.
   Retailers sometimes hurt themselves by delaying orders.
Children's Palace/Child World says suppliers couldn't fill
late orders on some popular items that sold out. But the
toy-store chain, which has cut inventories by 30% from last
year's levels, says it is staying the course.
   To underscore the chain's determination, Children's Palace
and Child World stores are cutting display shelf heights to
five feet from up to 12-thus having fully stocked shelves but
carrying less inventory than before. Even for hot-selling
items, such as Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis, the stores
require shipments every week or two, instead of just ordering
a pile of 50,000 in September.
   "Last year retailers bought a lot of stuff in August and
September and hoped it sold -- and if it didn't they dealt
with it in January," says the toy company's chairman, W. John
Devine. "We think there's a better way."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
