ID: 157	RANK: 52	SCORE: 4.761858
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871002-0135 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
The Brainy Nine?
---
By Frederick Klein</HL>
<DD> 10/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Chicago  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In 1939, Robert M. Hutchins, president of the University of Chicago, decreed that football was incompatible with the serious pursuit of higher education, and the U of C dropped the sport. 
The team's maroon football helmets were turned into planters, and Stagg Field, its 50,000-seat stadium, eventually was razed for (gasp!) a library. 

   A trend did not materialize, however, and Chicago's lonely gridiron pacifism ended in 1969, when varsity football returned to the campus on the grassy Midway, of which the Maroons were the first and only rightful Monsters in their Big Ten salad days. 
The new version was local, low-budget stuff, but it gave the students something to do on weekends besides studying and picketing. 

   To say that football has flourished at Chicago since its reinstatement would be an overstatement. 
The Maroons have had but one winning season in the past 18. 
Their main claim to fame in the sport over that stretch was the performance of Bruce Montella, a halfback who in 1985 led the NCAA's Division III members in rushing. 

   Montella later had a tryout with the professional Chicago Bears, usurpers of his school's old nickname as well as the football-shaped "C" on their helmets. 
He played in the Bears' first 1986 pre-season game against Dallas, and made a tackle on a kick runback. 
He was cut soon thereafter but, like any good U of C grad, quickly repaired to medical school, where he is learning how to become rich. 

   The university has been similarly plucky, and this year it has embarked on another athletic adventure. 
In concert with Brandeis near Boston, Case Western Reserve in Cleveland, Carnegie-Mellon in Pittsburgh, Emory in Atlanta, Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, New York University, the University of Rochester in New York and Washington University in St. Louis, it has formed the University Athletic Association. 
The institutions, academically high-toned all, are separated by as many as 1,000 miles. 
Thus, their teams will travel to games by plane, not bus, in as close to a national schedule as any universities either enjoy -- or suffer. 

   Despite their scholarly renown, the UAA schools are members of NCAA Division III, which means that they don't give athletic scholarships. 
In an unusual burst of candor on the subject, Richard Schultz, the NCAA's executive director-elect, recently called Division III athletes the nation's "last amateurs," although he probably also should have included grade-school kids. 

   Nonetheless, it's a higher-profile bunch than Monmouth, Knox, St. Norbert's and other members of the Midwest Collegiate Athletic Conference, of which Chicago previously was a member. 
Has athletic "re-emphasis" come to the school that just about invented that dreaded "d" word, de-emphasis? 

   "I don't know about that, but I'd certainly call it a new era," says Mary Jean Mulvaney, Chicago's tall, gray-haired, animated chairman of the department of physical education and athletics, who'd be known elsewhere as an A.D. "Let's just say we'll be more visible athletically than we were, and we think there'll be benefits in that." 

   The benefits that Ms. Mulvaney foresees are several. 
Chicago has numerous alumni in the East, where most UAA members are, and games there will provide them with a rallying point. 
It should help with student recruitment, and give U of C student-athletes (the term is appropriate here) a chance to check out possible graduate schools during game trips. 

   It might also help get the word around "that Chicago isn't all cement and tall buildings, and has a campus life for undergraduates," Ms. Mulvaney says, hopefully. 
She adds: "We dropped football for awhile, but we never dropped other varsity sports, like basketball, swimming and track. 
Still, I get shocked looks from some people when I tell them about our athletic programs. 
They say, 'Do you mean Chicago has sports?!'" 

   It does, and it and its UAA partners, no doubt in search of similar reassurances for their own constituencies, have embarked on schedules in 22 of them -- a dozen for men and 10 for women -- that will gladden the hearts of their travel agents. 

   Round-robin competition in men's and women's basketball will start this year, with a double-round-robin whirl set for 1988-89. 
There'll be round-robin play in men's and women's soccer and women's field hockey, and championship tournaments in cross-country, volleyball, fencing, indoor and outdoor track, wrestling, swimming, baseball, tennis and golf. 
Ms. Mulvaney figures the extra travel will add $50,000 to her department's budget this school year, and $150,000 by 1990, when the conference will be in full swing. 

   Football will be the last sport to achieve championship status in the new league, in 1990, and then with only five members competing: Chicago, Carnegie-Mellon, Case Western Reserve, Rochester and Washington. 
With traveling parties of between 65 and 80 players and coaches, it's easily the most expensive collegiate sport. 
Still, "we think it's worth it, if only as a symbol that we're back," Ms. Mulvaney declares. 

   The U of C hasn't exactly turned gung-ho for the sport. 
There's a new A.A. Stagg Field, named, like the first, for the university's legendary football coach of 40 years, but its single bleacher seats only about 750 people. 
Moreover, the current Maroons skip Thursday afternoon practice because that's lab day for most players. 

   The players, of course, take the game seriously, and have a win and a loss to show for their two outings this season. 
One linebacker has the last name of Bonebrake and, appropriately, he leads the team in tackles. 
A couple of the lineman are semi-big, and Brian Blitz, a sophomore halfback, is said to possess some Division I moves. 

   "They're all good kids, and fun to coach because they're so intelligent," smiles Mick Ewing, their veteran coach. 
But he admits they're not quite ready for prime time. 
"When I say a boy does a 4.0, I'm talking about his grade-point average, not his time for the 40-yard dash," he says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
