ID: 157	RANK: 54	SCORE: 4.710518
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870611-0088 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Laker Magic Overcomes Parquet Power
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 06/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Boston  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Los Angeles Lakers beat the Boston Celtics in Boston Garden Tuesday night. 
That's about like picking a siren up for a date and getting her back to the rocks before her guardian knows she's missing. 

   The score on the board was 107-106, L.A., and in games three to one in favor of same. 
If the Lakers win the best-of-seven clincher here tonight, the National Basketball Association season will have ended before the baseball pennant races are resolved. 
We must take what we can get in that regard. 

   The Lakers' victory was noteworthy mainly because visiting teams usually fare about as well in the Celts' lair as a hamburger does at McDonalds. 
The proud Bostonians haven't been their usual, prepossessing selves this year, dropping 23 regular-season games and getting shoved around a bit by the likes of Milwaukee and Detroit before scraping by them in the playoffs. 
On the road, injuries and fatigue have reduced them to so many traveling salesmen looking for a Ramada Inn to rest their weary bones. 
At home, though, the Celts had shown their old vibrancy, winning 47 of 49 this season, including a 109-103 decision over L.A. on Sunday. 

   Just what it is about the Gahden that transforms them is a matter of dispute. 
The Boston Globe devoted three full pages of its considerable sports section to the question on Tuesday, and the best it could come up with was the "Dead Spot Theory," which holds that the ball doesn't always bounce back right after it kisses the ancient parquet floor. 
This is said to confuse opponents. 

   I can't say I have a better answer after my first visit to the fabled place. 
Truth to tell, I was a bit disappointed that it wasn't scarier. 
It was brighter and cleaner than I'd been led to believe, and as far as I know, no vermin nibbled at my shoes as I took notes. 
Definite plusses included the wavy floors in the concourses and the exposed ductwork on the ceiling. 
The latter would have artistic merit if it could be liberated from all the laundry that the Celts and hockey Bruins hang there. 

   What it boils down to, I suppose, is that for all their travail, the Celtics remain a better basketball team than any save the boys from L.A., and I got the impression that even their fans agree with that exception. 
Coming into town from the airport I passed a billboard put up by WBZ, a local radio station. 
"Boston Celtics Beat L.A./ Every Dog Has His Day," it read. 
Hardly a war cry. 
The same went for a fan's banner Tuesday that proclaimed the Celtics' home to be the "Garden of Even." 
Since when has parity been this team's goal? 

   But that's the sort of thing that the Lakers have been doing to opponents all season. 
They've been declared the best-hoops-ensemble-ever so often that it may become accepted as fact. 
It is interesting in this regard that the NBA chose the Milwaukee Bucks, not the Lakers, to oppose teams from Italy and the Soviet Union in a ground-breaking international tournament just announced for these shores next October. 
The reasoning appears to be that if the Lakers must ever take on the Russians, it should be the whole country, not just a basketball team. 

   The Lakers possess in abundance the two things needed to excel in America's best-played sport: limitless talent and rare good luck. 
Their roster includes players who were the No. 1 college-draft choices in four different years: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Earvin "Magic" Johnson, James Worthy and Mychal Thompson. 
That they obtained all of those players, or their draft rights, through trades says as much about the rest of the league as it does about them. 

   Laker luck has taken the form of unbroken good health during the current campaign. 
L.A. had streaks of 28 and 26 games this season in which no player missed a game because of illness or injury. 
The Celts' Bill Walton sat out more games himself this season than all the Lakers combined. 

   In Johnson, the Lakers have the best team player in the game, if not the most gifted. 
He has proved that a 6-foot, 9-inch point guard needn't be a contradiction in terms, no small feat. 
The old Laker leader, the 7-foot-2 Abdul-Jabbar, now is a dignified gent of 40 years who has outgrown most of his hair and wears glasses (goggles, actually) on court. 
He shows no inclination to retire, though, and proves himself useful from time to time. 

   One of those times came Tuesday at the finish of one of the best games of this or any playoff round. 
The Lakers trailed by as many as 16 points in the third quarter, but clawed back to tie at 95 with 5 1/2 minutes left. 
Rather than fold, though, Boston put on a two-minute, eight-point spurt to regain the lead, 103-95. 

   Then the Celts developed fumblitis and the Lakers rallied again. 
They took the lead when, with a half-minute left, Magic Johnson passed the ball above the hoop and A-J roused himself for the variety of the slam dunk known as the Alley-Oop, but not in reference to his age. 

   Larry Bird, the Celtics' peerless shooter, countered with a breathtaking three-pointer from the left corner. 
The Lakers then went back to A-J, and he was fouled driving for a basket. 
He made one free throw and missed the next, but the rebound went out of bounds off a hand of Boston's Kevin McHale. 

   The Lakers inbounded to Magic, whose running version of A-J's skyhook with two seconds left set the final score. 
A buzzer shot by Bird clanged off the rim as the Gardeners groaned. 

   It is one measure of the man that Magic Johnson took pleasure in the game's crucial moments from the company of Bird, who had won the NBA's most valuable-player award three years running before Johnson took it this year. 
"That's me and Larry. 
We do what we have to do to win," he said, smiling broadly. 

   It is another measure of Magic that he paid homage to A-J for teaching him his game-winning hook shot and belittled his version of it. 
"It's a junior, junior, junior version of Kareem's skyhook," he said. 

   "Yeah, I taught him, but he put it in," Abdul-Jabbar said later. 
"He doesn't need me for help doing that." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
