ID: 157	RANK: 60	SCORE: 4.634845
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861212-0147 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Shortest Sport on the Court
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 12/12/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Charlotte, N.C.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Wake Forest University's basketball representatives were having their way with those from Davidson College here last week until an eight-point Davidson spurt narrowed their lead to 10 points early in the second half. 
Said Wake Forest senior guard Tyrone "Muggsy" Bogues to himself, "Enough of that!" 
Or somesuch. 

   On the Deacons' next offensive sally, Bogues sank a 12-foot jump shot, and after a Davidson miss he scooped up a loose rebound and dashed the length of the floor for a layup. 
He was fouled on the play and added a free throw. 
Another Davidson miss, and Bogues fed teammate Tony Black for an open 15-footer. 
Turn out the lights, etc. Final score: Deacs 75, Wildcats 60. 

   It wasn't exactly an NCAA final, so who cares? you well may ask. 
Well, Muggsy stands 5-feet, 3-inches tall. 
If he's not the shortest male player in college hoops today, he wouldn't have to lower his eyes much to regard the fella who is. 
Most nights, he's the shortest person on the court, including ballboys and cheerleaders. 

   Young Mr. Bogues's presence in the Wake Forest lineup is no mere bid by the Winston-Salem institution to attract the patronage of the pint-sized. 
This kid can play. 
After three varsity seasons he holds the school career record for most steals and, given a modicum of good health, he'll gain that distinction for assists before long. 
Last season, on a team that won just eight of 29 games and was 0-14 in the tough Atlantic Coast Conference, he averaged 11.3 points a game, was third in the nation in steals and eighth in assists and minutes played. 

   Muggsy gilded his legend over the summer by not only making the U.S. team that won the World Championship in Spain, but also starring. 
He had 10 steals and five assists in the gold-medal game against the Soviet Union. 
The Spanish press nicknamed him "la chispa negra," meaning "the black spark." 
The folks in Oviedo, one site of the tourney, were so taken with him that they invited him to be a guest of honor at their annual municipal feast in September. 
The mean old NCAA said no. 

   But, hey, Muggsy doesn't have to go abroad to be lionized. 
He probably holds the unofficial college mark for most standing ovations after games, and he receives a steady stream of letters from boys who want to be just like him if they don't grow up. 
He's even popular at archrival Duke, where the omnivorous student fans might be expected to pop him down like a shrimp hors d'oeuvre. 

   "Our band plays 'Short People' in his honor, but that's been about it. 
We really like him here," says John Roth, Duke's sports information director. 
Muggsy returns the sentiment because he enjoyed one of his best games at Duke, outplaying All-American Johnny Dawkins in an upset, 91-89, Deacon win two seasons back. 

   Little Big Man himself, a jaunty sort, vows that the basketball world ain't seen nothin' yet. 
"Being on the world championship team opened my eyes to my true potential. 
I'm playing better now than I ever did," he said before the Davidson fray. 
"People used to say I couldn't do this or that 'cause I was small. 
I don't hear that anymore." 

   The sturdily built Bogues says that he never considered his height an obstacle to basketball success. 
"The ball's on the floor as much as it's in the air, and when it's down there, I have the edge," he says with perfect logic. 
His nickname, which he sports in large gold letters from a neck chain, derives from ball-stealing skills acquired in the playgrounds of his native Baltimore. 

   He starred for two years at Baltimore's Dunbar High, which was coached by Bob Wade, now the new head coach at Maryland. 
More than a dozen basketball big-timers tried to recruit him. 
He says he picked Wake Forest, with an undergraduate enrollment of 3,200, "because I thought going to a small school would be nice." 

   Once he was in Winston-Salem, the academic side of college nearly floored him. 
"Classes covered more in a week than we did all year in high school. 
I thought I'd never adjust," he admits. 
One upshot of his classroom struggles was his being placed on school probation for a period for plagiarizing a paper in a literature course. 
He says that was really a "mixup" involving a student who tutored him. 

   He avers that he has righted his academic career and expects to graduate next summer with a degree in speech communications unless a professional basketball offer intervenes. 
Even if one does, he vows to finish his degree requirements sometime. 
"I'm proud of sticking it out in class," he says. 
"Getting a diploma is a big goal with me." 

   His basketball goals this season are to improve his shooting (his average from the floor going into this season was .456) and help get some more wins for his team. 
So far, he has done both. 
The Deacs are 2-0 in the young campaign, and Muggsy is their leading scorer with 39 points. 
His 23 shots have netted 15 baskets, four from three-point range. 

   Bogues scored 21 points against Davidson, but equally impressive were his game-leading seven assists and his defense against 6-foot-1 Derek Rucker, Davidson's All-Southern Conference guard. 
Rucker scored 20, but 12 of them came on three-point shots from the twilight zone that a 6-foot, 6-inch player couldn't have stopped, and he had only three assists. 
As usual, Muggsy handled the ball on just about every Wake Forest possession, and "you can't steal the ball from him unless you're a ground hog," Temple coach John Chaney has remarked. 

   Wake Forest's coach, Bob Staak, is no less appreciative. 
"Muggsy's a great kid with a great work ethic, and you never have to tell him anything more than once," he says. 
"Having him around is like having another coach on the floor in practice. 
If another kid needs help, he's right there to give it to him." 

   "You mean the other players look up to him?" 
I asked. 

   "Oh, yeah. 
They really do," he answered. 
He didn't get the joke right away. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
