ID: 157	RANK: 63	SCORE: 4.598343

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06315185 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06315185 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (7); Photography by Tom Van Dyke; PHOTO: For the photographer, Hardaway
entered into a four-on-four pickup game in an Oakland park. "Everybody was
playing hard, except Tim," says Roland Viray, 21. "I could tell he wasn't,
'cause if he did, he could've beaten us all by himself." (color); PHOTOS: (4)
ONE ON ONE against truck driver Bill Wolosky, Hardaway demonstrates how to get
around an opponent. "I said, 'Tim, let me steal the ball,' " Wolosky recalls.
"And he said, 'That would make your day, wouldn't it?' So I reached for the
ball, and he was gone. I will say this, though: I scored over Hardaway. I
scored a layup over him."; PHOTO: HARDAWAY may claim that he's 6 feet tall,
but when he's surrounded by other Warriors, it's hard to believe. No matter
how tall he is, he doesn't play small.; COVER PHOTOGRAPH by Sam Forencich; TIM
HARDAWAY HAS SOMETHING TO PROVE; Like maybe he's the next NBA superstar?
(color)  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  BASKETBALL; PROFESSIONAL; OAKLAND; PROFILE; MAJOR-STORY  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  THE BOYZ IN THE 'HOOD ON CHICAGO'S South Side still say Tim Hardaway ain't no
big deal.;   "They still think I'm not going to be a good ballplayer in the
NBA," Hardaway, the Warriors' star guard, said over lunch recently.  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  West  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  BIGGER THAN LIFE
TIM HARDAWAY'S UNSTOPPABLE DRIVE TOOK HIM FROM THE
PLAYGROUNDS OF CHICAGO'S SOUTH SIDE TO THE NBA.
BUT HE STILL PLAYS AS IF HIS OPPONENTS WERE THE
HOMEBOYS.  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  BUD GERACIE is a Mercury News sports writer.  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     Hardaway can't be serious about this. But he is -- deadly serious. His
cherubic face has turned to stone. His easy laugh has vanished without a
trace. Hardaway spits out the words as though they were bits of rotten food.; 
 "They said, 'He's too short to play college basketball.' I played college
basketball. They said, 'Nobody wants him in the NBA. Isiah Thomas, Michael
Jordan, Magic Johnson -- they're gonna kill him. They're gonna make him wish
he was back here with us, playing recreation basketball.';   "They say last
year was a good season, but what about this year? If I do better this year,
next year it'll be something else.";   Hardaway comes up for air, and you
wonder why he cares what they think anymore.; ANYBODY WITH A CLEAR head and
eyes can see that Hardaway arrived as an NBA star last season. The only
question about this year is whether he'll cross over into superstardom. There
isn't much question he will -- eventually.;   "There's no better small player
in the league than this guy," says Los Angeles Lakers GM Jerry West, the Hall
of Fame guard. "He's a tremendous player. And he's going to get better.";  
Last season, Hardaway's second in the National Basketball Association, he
averaged 23 points and 10 assists per game. He was the youngest player (24)
selected to play in the All-Star Game, although his greatest honor might have
come after the season, when Magic Johnson invited Hardaway to play in his
personal all-star game in L.A.;   It's possible we're witnessing the
beginnings of a Hall of Fame career. Hardaway's coach, Don Nelson of the
Warriors, dismisses the notion as ridiculously premature. Then he smiles and
says, "He has had a good start, though, hasn't he?";   The fact is, only one
player in NBA history has had a better start than Hardaway. Only one player in
NBA history had more points and more assists after his first two seasons, and
that player was Hall of Famer Oscar Robertson.;   "Next to Michael Jordan,
Hardaway might be the toughest player in the league to stop," says longtime
NBA guard Danny Ainge.;   "I call him Stud Imperial," said Philadelphia's
Charles Barkley after Hardaway scored 40 points to beat the 76ers last
January. "I'm putting him on the same page with (Phoenix guard) Kevin Johnson,
but at the top of the page. . . . Tim Hardaway can't be stopped.";   THE BEST
NBA PLAYER TO come out of the 1989 draft was chosen 14th. Hardaway also had
enjoyed a choice of colleges: the University of Texas at El Paso, or Western
Illinois. The pro scouts, like the college scouts before them, were scared off
by two things: Hardaway's size and Hardaway's shot.;   Hardaway claims to be 6
feet tall. Challenge that claim, and he repeats it with conviction. Ask a
third time. . . . "I'm 6 feet," Hardaway announces. Case closed. Do not tell
this man he can't be something, even if it seems to you to be something
insignificant.;   Incidentally, three years ago as a college senior, Hardaway
received the Frances Pomeroy Naismith award, which is given annually to the
best college basketball player under 6 feet. Recent growth spurt, no doubt.;  
Hardaway's shot never will be pictured in a coaching manual, unless the
heading is How Not to Shoot a Basketball. Hardaway shoots it out of the palm
of his hand, rather than with his fingertips. The result is a no-rotation
shot, "a knuckleball," says Warriors teammate Mitch Richmond.;   Hardaway says
only two coaches in the Western Hemisphere haven't tried to change his shot.
One is Donald Pittman. The other is Nelson.;   Says Nelson: "I told him, 'I'm
not going to bother you your first year. But if you can't shoot, we're gonna
have to do a major change on your shot.' Now we're thinking of maybe changing
some guys to shoot like him.";   PITTMAN WAS HARDAWAY'S first coach. "I
remember when the ball seemed bigger than Tim," he says.;   Tim was a
fifth-grader at Kohn Elementary in Chicago. Pittman coached a sixth-grade
team, and from the first day of school that year the kid was hounding him for
a spot on the team.;   "He was about 3-foot-6 then -- literally," Pittman
says. "I made him the manager. When we needed an extra guy, I suited him up.
He'd play if we were ahead. He always was a magician with the ball.";   No
wonder. Hardaway grew up with the ball in his hands. When he was 2 years old,
his mother, Gwendolyn, brought home a toy car, shiny red. That same day, Tim's
father, Donald, brought home a basketball. Gwen Hardaway remembers looking in
on her baby that night and finding the toy car on the floor next to his bed.
Her 2-year-old was sleeping with a basketball.;   Gwen and Donald Hardaway
split up when Tim was 12. Tim and his brother, Donald Jr., seven years
younger, were raised by their mother. Donald Hardaway remained a part of his
sons' lives. A 6-foot-3 legend on the Chicago playgrounds, he showed his
eldest son about toughness, about confidence, about playing the game right.;  
But it was Gwen Hardaway who provided the daily lessons about life and love
and hard work and doing the right thing. She and Tim have a special bond, full
of love, free of embarrassment. "She's an excellent person," says Tim. "I love
her to death. . . . I can't even describe Mom. It's like being in the All-Star
Game; you can't describe the feeling.";   The boy wasn't much trouble, she
says, and when he was, she sat him down. She sat him down for two months once,
prohibiting him from playing basketball with his team because he was getting
"too cocky." He was allowed to practice on his own, however. Momma Hardaway is
tough; to this day, she walks a four-hour beat as a postal carrier. But she's
no tyrant.;   "I always knew where he was," she says. "On the basketball
court, all the time, every day.";   AMONG THE WONDERS of Hardaway's game is
that he looks as if he has been around for years. The reason might be that he
has been through so much in 25 years.;   Minnie Eubanks. Ben Wilson. Jeep
Jackson. Bob Walters. Each was a part of Hardaway's life. All are gone.;  
Minnie Eubanks was his maternal grandmother. She lived with the family after
his parents separated. She died in the summer of 1990, and Hardaway honored
her last season by wearing her initials on his size-12 basketball shoes. Of
all the losses he has suffered, hers was "the ultimate," he says.;   Bob
Walters was the basketball coach at Carver High School. Carver is in a tough
neighborhood, a long way from the Hardaway home. The basketball is tougher
too, which is exactly why Hardaway chose Carver. It's where Cazzie Russell
went. So did Terry Cummings of the San Antonio Spurs.;   Bob Walters was "like
a dad to me," says Hardaway.;   "He was just fantastic with Timothy," says
Gwen Hardaway. "He helped out in so many ways. When he got cancer, Tim would
go over there to mow the lawn or shovel snow. They were very, very close.";  
Bob Walters died in 1987 at age 40. Tim, a sophomore at UT-El Paso, returned
home for the funeral. "It was very heartbreaking for Tim," says Gwen. "I
didn't know what to do; I just hugged him. It was the first time death had
ever meant anything to him. Ben Wilson, that had been a different type of
thing.";   Ben Wilson was a playground buddy and maybe the most promising high
school basketball player in Chicago history. When he and Tim were seniors, Ben
Wilson was shot and killed by another youth. Two years later, not long after
Hardaway returned from burying his high school coach, his college backcourt
mate, Jeep Jackson, collapsed and died of a heart attack.;   You ask Hardaway
what tragedy has taught him.;   "Life is short," he replies.;   REX BRADBURD,
A NEW ASSISTANT coach at UT-El Paso, signed his first recruit after watching
him twice -- once on a windswept playground and later in a pick-up game at a
Chicago YMCA.;   "I saw Tim make every shot he took in that wind," Bradburd
says, but it was what he saw the second time that sold him.;   "He had this
uncanny knack. When he hit a guy with a pass, he always hit him at just the
right time. . . . Tim was doing things you can't teach. He was at a different
level. You can't put it in words, really. It's like asking why Coltrane is a
great saxophonist." Or how it feels to be the son of Gwen Hardaway playing in
the NBA All-Star Game.;   As a senior at UT-El Paso, Hardaway averaged 22
points per game and was named the league's Player of the Year. The folks in
West Texas can't understand how the pros overlooked him. Must be geography,
they say. UTEP is in the Mountain Time Zone, a no-man's-land when it comes to
national television exposure.;   But Mitch Richmond remembers catching
Hardaway's act one night while scanning the channels. "I thought he was 6-5,"
says Richmond.;   Hardaway doesn't play small, and he doesn't look small.
Although he claims never to have lifted a barbell, he is a thick, muscular 175
pounds. Like his dad, he says. Hardaway doesn't act small, either. He's got a
macho walk, and he can talk the talk.;   Exhibit A: NBA playoffs, Warriors at
San Antonio, Game 2. Hardaway is coming off a disastrous performance in his
first postseason game as a pro. You'd never guess it, though, because every
time he brings the ball upcourt, he taunts the San Antonio guards. "Here it
comes," he tells them, "you can't stop it.";   And they can't. All night long,
he talks and backs it up. Hardaway recovers from his opening-night disaster by
scoring 20 points, dishing out nine assists and making four steals in a
victory that ties the series. The Warriors win it in five games, Hardaway
scoring 32 points in the clincher. He finishes the postseason averaging 25
points and 11 assists.;   "I think he should talk less on the floor," says
Nelson, "but I get a kick out of it sometimes, because he's so competitive
with it. Some times, I have to look the other way and laugh a little bit.";  
The landmark moment in Hardaway's career as a tough guy came in the third game
last season, the Warriors' home opener against the Los Angeles Clippers.;   Bo
Kimble, the Clippers' 6-foot-5 rookie, took a swing at Hardaway while the two
were jockeying for position in the lane. Hardaway spun around and was in
Kimble's face immediately. "Bo," he said, loud enough to hear on press row,
"if you ever do that again, I'll kick your ass.";   He probably will anyway,
says Richmond. Once you're on Hardaway's hit list, you're pretty much there
for life. Little man holds big grudge.;   THREE YEARS AFTER THE 1989 draft,
the Warriors still can't believe their good fortune. They figured Hardaway
might be gone by the fourth pick, and here he was available with the 14th
pick. If everybody was scared off by his size and his shot, why weren't the
Warriors?;   " 'Cuz his ball always went in when we saw him," says Nelson.;  
Now it goes in with even greater frequency. Hardaway shot almost 48 percent
last season, despite attempting more long-range shots than ever before. One
theory is that Hardaway is so tough, the ball is afraid not to go in. Another
is that through diligence, Hardaway has mastered bad technique.;   His college
coach, Don Haskins, remembers something golfer Lee Trevino once told him.;  
"Lee was standing there with golf balls all around him and he said, 'You know,
the more I hit, the luckier I seem to get.' . . . That's the thing about Tim;
I bet he's out shooting somewhere right now. He never could understand guys
who didn't want to work on their games.";   The summer after his rookie season
Hardaway shot 300 to 500 balls daily. He knew what it could mean to his game.;
  Already, he had perfected his "crossover" move, a bit of ballhandling
wizardry that routinely cripples even the best defenders. Follow the bouncing
ball: Ball in right hand. Ball between legs to left hand. Ball back to right
hand, and bye-bye. It doesn't sound like much at this speed, but try it at 100
mph with a head-and-shoulders fake.;   Until last season, there was only one
way to stop Hardaway from driving to the basket, and that was to let him shoot
the outside jumper. Now there is no way to stop Hardaway. Give him the outside
jumper, and he'll hit it. Play him tight, and he'll embarrass you with his
move to the basket. Here it comes; can't stop it.;   SO WHAT CAN POSSIBLY keep
Tim Hardaway from going all the way to the top? Everybody worries about an
injury. Donald Pittman worries about Tim.;   "He's dealing with a lot of
negative influences who want to be part of his success," says the grade-school
coach who remains in touch with Hardaway.;   "This is something a lot of
blacks go through," Pittman says. "You made it, (and) all your buddies didn't.
You can't go on hanging out with them. You can't try to be accepted by them.
What Tim should do is forget about those guys and move on to the next
generation; show those kids how he was different, why he made it.;   "There's
a lot of them he's still tight with. . . . If he feels he owes them something,
he could end up doing himself a lot of damage.";   Pittman is watching over
Hardaway, as he has since the days at Kohn Elementary. Some nights Tim comes
home and the message light is flashing and it's Pittman's voice on the
answering machine, saying, "This is your conscience calling." It's a joke
between them.;   But Pittman is serious, deadly serious. He knows how hard it
can be, having endured the experience at roughly the same age. He raised
himself out of a bad neighborhood, much worse than Hardaway's, got himself an
education and became a schoolteacher. Now 40, Pittman is an assistant high
school principal, living an upper-middle class life in the Chicago suburbs.;  
"I had guys I had to get away from," he says. "Tim's (situation) is on a much
larger scale. He's gotta shake these guys.";   Hardaway does not share
Pittman's concern. Those guys pose him no problem, he says -- well, maybe just
one.;   "A lot of people in Chicago don't want to admit they were wrong. . . .
I've always had to prove myself, and I'm still having to prove myself."
Hardaway stops to consider his words, and he brightens. "That's good, I
think.";   Someday Hardaway won't need the boyz. Self-approval will be enough.
It's the biggest crossover move he'll ever make.  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  Bud Geracie  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   911110  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  November  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  16  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  PHOTO  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,743  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday, November 10, 1991
00315185,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
