ID: 157	RANK: 68	SCORE: 4.560297
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880226-0074 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sports (A Special Report): Watching It --- The Ultimate Spectator Sport: Fans Differ From Stadium to Stadium, So Take Along This Unofficial Guide </HL>
<AUTHOR> William Power </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   IT RAINS BATTERIES in Pittsburgh, cowbells in St. Louis. 
It pours toilet paper in parts of Michigan. 
Obscenities do most of the damage in New York. 

   These are some of the quirks of sports fans across the country. 
All fans aren't necessarily as lively as these examples. 
But before treading into unknown territory, the traveling sports fan might heed this advice on dealing with the personalities of some cities' unusual fans and the coliseums that (try to) accommodate them. 
All generalizations and municipal insults are final. 

   ---
   SCIENTIFIC FACTS: A Definitive Wall Street Journal survey of nationwide experts reveals some of the sporting events that bring out the most rabid fans: hockey in Canada; Redskins, Bears and Southern high school football; Indiana basketball; Cubs baseball; any professional wrestling spectacle; and, of course, auto shows on Long Island, N.Y. 
The most docile? 
New Jersey Nets basketball fans. 
Says Doug Mittler, an editor at SportsTicker wire service in Scarsdale, N.Y.: "It's a dull team, a dull crowd. 
So bring a book." 

   ---
   USING THE BATHROOM IS a challenge at Central Michigan University basketball games, where toilet paper is a hot commodity. 
After the first basket, fans flood the court with as many as 4,500 rolls of toilet paper. 
"There's always a definite toilet-paper shortage on campus," says Fred Stabley Jr., Central's sports information director. 
But a warning from the MidAmerican Conference is curtailing the bombardments -- and the team's chances. 
Central's record is 14-0 at home while under bombardment, 3-3 since crackdown. 

   ---
   WATCHING HOCKEY IN Detroit has its own hazards. 
A previous investigation by this newspaper found fans there had the strange habit of tossing dead octopuses onto the ice to celebrate. 

   ---
   CHECK YOUR AFFILIATION: don't wear a new York Mets cap in any other part of the country. 
More important, don't wear New York Rangers hockey clothing at Islanders games on Long Island or Islanders gear at Rangers games in New York -- unless you can back it up. 

   ---
   CHECK YOUR SCORECARD at New Jersey's Meadowlands to see which home team is playing. 
It's strange enough that the New York Jets and Giants football teams both play home games in Jersey. 
Stranger still, Jets fans have more fights. 
The unofficial reason: Giants season tickets are more cherished and stay in the family; that means Jets fans are younger and presumably less mature. 
Remember, they used to watch Mark Gastineau's now-banned sack dances. 

   ---
   WHAT IS THIS? 
OPERA? 
Philadelphia's Spectrum won't let you return to your seat with food until there's a stop in the action. 
Stop in the action? 
Hockey isn't a sport with many lulls, except the boxing intermissions. 

   ---
   WRIGLEY MANIA: IF nothing else, remember we warned you about Chicago's Wrigley Field, where the left-field and right-field bleacher bums spend the game debating each side's worth to mankind. (The chants aren't printable.) 
Part of the cause, according to one Wrigley veteran: "I think the ratio is 2-to-1 of beer vendors to fans." 

   ---
   GARDEN MANIA: IT doesn't pay to be rich at Madison Square Garden in New York. 
At Rangers hockey games, Wall Street types who get seats near the ice (the "reds") feud with the diehard, nonfinancial types who inhabit the upper section (the "blues"). 
"There's real class antagonism there," reports one fan who sits in another section. 
Lately, an obscene chant, "Wall Street ----s," has thundered down on the young Wall Streeters, who are too busy fighting among themselves to care. 

   ---
   COME LATE, LEAVE EARLY when attending Dodger baseball in Los Angeles. 
To fit in with the locals, arrive around the third inning, park near the freeway (where the real action is), watch the nice grass for a couple of innings and then leave. 
L.A. fans' laid-back approach is attributed to announcer Vin Scully's soothing play-by-play, which wafts out of thousands of portable radios and through the stadium air. 

   ---
   NO-FRILLS BASEBALL: the detroit tigers took pride in not offering gimmicks like free radios and watches to their old-fashioned fans. 
The fans "are out to see a ball game," says Jim Campbell, club president. 
But he concedes that the team now is looking into promotional items. 
The club's history with such things isn't encouraging. 
A fireworks night in 1960 burned down a house. 

   ---
   HARD-HAT COUNTRY: Bring protective gear in Pittsburgh and St. Louis. 
Three Rivers Stadium fans in Pittsburgh weren't trying to energize their slugger Dave Parker when, a few years ago, they pelted him with small batteries, as well as a steel valve. 
Mr. Parker has since been traded, but you should remain cautious. 
A St. Louis fan proved the existence of an equal intelligence in that city last year by whizzing a cow bell at Jeffrey Leonard, a San Francisco Giants player whose teammate had branded St. Louis a "cow town." 
Yankee Stadium in the Bronx, however, is the only ballpark to report a knife toss. 

   ---
   BUT FOR REAL VIOLENCE, remember that soccer takes the cup. 
You know to bring riot gear to European matches. 
But the latest twist in soccer violence is in the Soviet Union. 
A recent riot after a game between Moscow Spartak and Dynamo Kiev, for example, led to 13 arrests. 
Some analysts are blaming it on glasnost. 

   ---
   Mr. Power is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
