ID: 157	RANK: 76	SCORE: 4.541521
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880226-0076 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sports (A Special Report): Watching It --- Sports Potato: Our Reporter Overdoses on a Weekend of ESPN That Includes Grouse Hunting and Truck Pulling </HL>
<AUTHOR> William M. Bulkeley </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> CCB </CO>
<IN> TEL </IN>
<TEXT>
   IT IS 11:30 Saturday night. 
My contact lenses are drying out from overexposure to televised sports. 
From the other room my wife, Debra, asks if I'm coming to bed. 
I ignore her. 
Arizona is playing New Mexico in The Pit at Albuquerque -- the fourth college basketball game on the tube in the past 10 hours. 

   I splash in some eyedrops, pop open another beer and feel a small surge of adrenaline. 
I really want to see this game. 

   Besides, this is for science -- or something like it. 
Ever since my editors asked for a volunteer to watch nothing but televised sports on ESPN for a whole weekend, I have been waiting with a mixture of worry and excitement. 
Overdosing seems a real possibility. 
Could hours of bass-fishing, boxing and body-building sate my sports appetite? 
Would ESPN, the 24-hour-a-day cable network, prove too much of a good thing? 

   Naw. 
At least, it didn't seem likely. 
I'm a sports junkie. 
A whole weekend of nothing but televised sports sounds like fun, and it is made possible by ESPN. 
The network is eight years old but is new to me because historic preservationists have blocked television cables from being hung over the streets in my Boston neighborhood. 

   So I'm ready. 
New Year's Day, after an afternoon of eating my mother-in-law's chicken, I weigh in at 175 pounds. 
I pack an overnight bag with clothes -- and a satchel with beer and potato chips -- and head for a nearby Embassy Suites hotel figuring I need a well-furnished suite. 
After all, I can't be a couch potato without a couch. 
And the beer and soft drinks require refrigeration. 

   At 5:47, I turn on the television. 
The Sugar Bowl is on ABC. 
The Rose Bowl is on NBC. 
A local station is reprising the Red Sox season. 
And ESPN has a feature on a high-school soccer team. 
Given my druthers, I'd be focused on the Sugar Bowl, but given my assignment, I watch the lanky Carolina schoolboys kicking and passing against a distant background of blue mountains and remember my own efforts on a high school soccer team that achieved a depressingly symmetrical 1-11-1 record. 

   An orgy of sports but a dearth of junk food. 
Then a bellman arrives with a gift basket. 
My friend, Amy Perry, has sent over an ESPN Weekend Survival Kit: cold roast chicken, Fritos, popcorn, peanuts, a half-pound of cheese, crackers, Gatorade -- and Maalox. 

   Over the next six hours, the sports orgy goes on. 
ESPN has an interview with a pro quarterback (yawn); skiing (terrifying shots of back-country skiers in British Columbia); an antique-car race and auction from Palm Springs, Calif. (the cars are classic, the auctioneer isn't). 

   Next come drag races from Bristol, Tenn. 
Men sit in odd-looking vehicles next to a red light, stomp the pedal when it turns green and deploy parachutes to stop some five seconds later. 
The mechanics who put together these weird machines must have talent. 
The drivers, who don't even have to turn the steering wheel as they scream down the track, get interviewed. 
This is sports? 
Then come women's weight-lifting championships from Daytona Beach, Fla. (surprisingly dramatic); and a body-builders' contest from Tucson, Ariz., followed by the late sports news. 
I tune out at midnight. 

   Saturday morning I arise at 8:30 and click on "America's best-known fisherman," giving advice on catching bass in cold weather from the seat of a bass boat in Louisiana. 
"When you fish in cold water, you have to think slow -- real slow," he says. 

   Since I'm thinking real slow myself, I watch as Mr. Dance hooks and releases bass after bass. 
Debra -- she isn't required to stay -- leaves for the day. 
By 9, when another friendly, drawling fisherman appears at another fishing hole, I'm impatient. 
I go out for a three-mile run. 

   When I return, ESPN has grouse hunters in the woods somewhere. 
As the day continues, there is sports news, Olympics news, a 1979 Sugar Ray Leonard boxing match (much better than the average live fight), a reprise of the 1968 NCAA basketball championships, a live hockey game, a talk show (too much sociology and not enough sports talk) and a body-building show (the hulks are interesting, but a flaccid swimsuit model is out of place). 

   It seems to me that an awful lot of people on the U.S. sports scene have Southern accents. 
Football coaches do. 
Fishermen do. 
Tractor-pullers do. 
Race-car drivers do -- even those from places like Pennsylvania and California. 

   Despite my initial doubts, I am increasingly drawn into sports I had barely heard of and the passions they evoke. 
I may be bored to tears by a drag race, but I can't help watching a racer who is moved to tears by his triumph. 

   Debra returns, hungry. 
She urges total escape from television sports. 
We go to a Thai restaurant in a Harvard Square basement. 

   I return to watch three consecutive college basketball games -- a mere 1.7% of the 180-game schedule ESPN is showing during the winter season. 
The first is rousing, the second grinding and the third -- New Mexico's upset of Arizona -- is a nail-biter. 
At 1:30 a.m. 
I go to bed. 

   By 9 Sunday morning I'm eager to turn on the TV again. 
I find highlights in all sorts of unlikely places. 

   There are a number of memorable people. 
Teddy Huang, a 17-year-old, straight-A student from Los Altos, Calif., is first violin in a youth orchestra and a national champion windsurfer, careening around San Francisco Bay. 
Karyn Marshall, a New York financial analyst, wins the 181-pound-class weight-lifting championship. 
Steve Kerr, son of the assassinated president of American University in Beirut, is the heady point guard on the University of Arizona basketball team. 

   There are cliches galore. 
But there is also colorful imagery. 
A sweating body-builder calls his sit-ups "stomach crunches." 
Laconic A.J. Foyt recalls the lack of safety devices in race cars of the 1950s when carelessness meant some "sheet time" in the hospital. 

   Although I love to ski, a feature on last winter's World Cup skiing totally bores me. 
A series of undifferentiated skiers rush through the last five gates of the race and onto the victory stand. 
An announcer throws a stream of questions at an uncomprehending Swiss downhiller. 
Finally the announcer presses his point home: "This must be a dream come true," he says. 
"Sure, sure," responds the Swiss. 

   My weekend of ESPN is ending. 
I check out and go home to study the ravages of a weekend of junk food. 
I weigh 180 pounds, up five pounds since Friday. 
I sigh, open a beer and turn on the last quarter of the football game between the Seahawks and the Houston Oilers. 
I feel a small surge of adrenaline. 
I really want to see this game. 

   ---
   Mr. Bulkeley covers computer companies and roots for the Celtics from The Wall Street Journal's Boston bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
