ID: 157	RANK: 85	SCORE: 4.458777
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870401-0142 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Hoosiers Play It Smart
---
By Frederick C. 
</HL>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> New Orleans  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The NCAA basketball tournament was notable start to finish for its tight-squeeze contests, so it was fitting that the skinniest kid on the court finally made the difference by the thinnest of margins. 

   The lad in question is Keith Smart, who plays guard for Indiana University. 
He stands 6 feet 1 inch tall and I'd be willing to wager that his real weight is closer to 150 pounds than to the 175 advertised in the program. 
Somehow, he manages to rise as much as 40 inches above the earth's surface when he springs upward on his bony gams. 

   On Monday night here, with his team trailing the boys from Syracuse 72-73 and five ticks remaining on the game clock, Smart took a pass from teammate Darryl Thomas on the left baseline, soared high, and flicked a 10-footer through the hoop. 
The ball bounced around on the floor for four seconds more before a Syracuse player could catch a referee's eye with a timeout signal. 
When Syracuse finally inbounded the ball for a final shot, young Smart intercepted and heaved it into the Indiana cheering section as time expired. 

   Later, he proved almost equally springy in fielding questions about his heroics. 
How about that last shot? 
"Darryl made a wise decision passing me the ball," Smart said, smilingly broadly. 
Had he ever before won a game with a dying-second bucket? 
"Sure. 
A pickup game." 

   The Indiana-Syracuse finale of the most evenly contested college-hoop tourney in memory was about as far from a pickup game as you could get. 
It was a vintage example of "coach-ball," a grinding chess game with human parts manipulated by coaches Bob Knight of Indiana and Jim Boeheim of Syracuse. 
Between the TV coverage of the contest and its newspaper treatment on Tuesday, the nation now should be fully conversant with such terms as "box-and-one," "two-three zone" and "pick and roll." 

   It also should know that Mr. Knight, as a man of principle, has not changed his view about the three-point shot, a this-season innovation that he views with about as much enthusiasm as he does a gold chain around the neck of one of his players (Keith Smart makes it a point not to wear his to practice or games). 
Indiana's margin of victory was more than provided by a seven-to-four edge -- 21 points to 12 -- in three-pointers, with smooth-haired Steve Alford scoring all of the Hoosiers'. 
"It's still the thing I like least of all in basketball," Knight grumped later. 
But he didn't say that he'd give back the points, or the trophy. 

   The 74-73 victory, before 65,000 "live" witnesses in the Superdome, a vast hall better suited to football or truck pulls than basketball (some people needed binoculars to see the court), was Knight's third national championship at the Bloomington, Ind., school. 
The other two came in 1976 and '81. 
Among other active coaches, only Louisville's Denny Crum has won the tourney even twice. 

   The victory capped a week in which Knight not only contained his famous temper but basked in the attention of the assembled news media. 
At a press conference on Sunday, a day after his team's marvelous 97-93 semifinal win over Nevada-Las Vegas, he went on at length about his heroes (Ted Williams, Vince Lombardi and Paul Brown, among others), coaching philosophy ("you can't do this year what you did last year"), and epitaph ("he got the most out of what he had"). 

   Asked if he were "unyielding" (whatever that meant), he turned the floor over to two of his players, center Dean Garrett and forward Thomas. 
"Am I unyielding?" he asked Garrett, his hand on the back of the player's neck. 
"No, coach," came the reply. 
"Darryl?" 
"No, coach." 
End of topic. 

   In truth, Knight attracts the kind of players who are used to his brand of high-decibel discipline. 
Thomas, a senior from suburban Chicago, noted that "screaming and yelling is part of life," and that "next to my father, Coach Knight is lenient." 
Garrett, a 6-foot-10 youth from San Clemente, Calif., said that his junior-college coach "went about things the same way" as Knight does. 
"I feel right at home at Indiana," he added. 

   Perhaps the ultimate Bob Knight player is Alford, a high-school coach's son who is twice an all-American guard despite being labeled too short (at 6-2), too slow and too white. 
"Steve's an overachiever," says Knight, paying him his supreme compliment. 
"Just about every time I think I'm right and he's wrong," Alford replies, "the films show he's right." 

   On Monday night, against a Syracuse team as well-coached as his, Knight needed every wile (and quite awhile) to win. 
The Syracuse chess piece who gave him the most trouble was Derrick Coleman, an agile, 6-foot-9 freshman forward who grabbed 13 rebounds and scored six points in the first half. 
Indiana held him to six boards and two points in half two, thanks in large part to an energetic effort by Thomas. 

   Indiana also needed to rebound from a 52-44 deficit with 13 minutes left, which it did with a 10-straight-points surge. 
From there, the game was tied at 54, 61, 63, 65, 68 and 70 points before Smart put it away with a display of pure physical acumen. 
He scored not only the winning basket, but 12 of his team's last 15 points on a combination of drives, spins and leaps. 
"Syracuse was sagging in on our big men, and ganging up on Steve, so I took what they gave me," he said, too modestly. 

   Smart, a junior, is a native of Baton Rouge, La. 
His only previous visit to the Superdome had been as a nine-year-old Cub Scout. 
As a high-school senior, he stood just 5-foot-7-inches tall, and went unrecruited. 
A broken wrist in a teen-age motorcycle accident further set back his athletic career. 
"I was a late grower and a late bloomer," he said. 
He bloomed just in time. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
