ID: 157	RANK: 87	SCORE: 4.422206
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870305-0083 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Television Preview, March 5-18: Hoops and More Hoops
---
By Martha Bayles</HL>
<DD> 03/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Saturday, March 7, 10-11 p.m. EST, on ABC: "Spenser: For Hire." 
Fans of the Boston-based detective writer Robert B. Parker should keep an eye out for this episode: It's the first one in the series with a script actually written by Mr. Parker. 
Likewise, fans of Avery Brooks should know that, for a change, the story revolves around the character of Hawk. 

   Sunday, March 8: College basketball championships. 1-3 p.m. EST, on NBC: The Atlantic Coast Conference Tournament Championship; 2 and 4 p.m., EST on ABC: The championship games of the Southeastern Conference, the Pacific 10 Conference and the Big Eight Conference; and 2:304:30 p.m. EST, on CBS: the Big East Tournament. 

   Sunday, March 8, 9-11 p.m. EST, on NBC: "The Abduction of Kari Swenson." 
The striking actress Tracy Pollan (Alex's girlfriend in last season's "Family Ties") stars in this truth-is-stranger-than-fiction movie about a young biathlon champion who was kidnapped by two bizarre "mountain men" in the Montana mountains in 1984. 
It's the sort of plot no writer would dare invent -- meaning it's a helluva story! 

   Tuesday, March 10, 4-5 p.m. EST, on NBC: "Main Street." 
This news and discussion show aimed at young people will have a distinguished guest: former Chief Justice Warren Burger, interpreting the Constitution from the viewpoint of teenagers and students. 
Bryant Gumbel presides. 

   Wednesday, March 11, 10-11 p.m. EST, on NBC: "Nuclear Power -- In France It Works." 
The U.S. was big on competitiveness, the French on centralization and standardization. 
Our nuclear industry is a rusting failure, theirs a humming success. 
Or so argues this persuasive NBC News special, produced by Reuven Frank and reported by Steve Delaney. 

   Thursdays, March 12 and 19, 8-9 p.m. and midnight-1 a.m. EST, on A&amp;E (repeat dates include March 13 and 16 {part I} and March 20 and 23 {part II} ): "The Diary of Anne Frank." 
The famous diary by the daughter of a Jewish family who tried, and ultimately failed, to hide from the Nazis in occupied Holland, was originally published 40 years ago. 
A&amp;E and the BBC have commemorated the occasion by co-producing this quiet but effective two-part film. 

   Friday, March 13, 9-10:30 p.m. EST, on PBS (PBS air dates and times vary, so check local listings): "James Stewart: A Wonderful Life." 
If you enjoy the beloved Mr. Stewart's appearances on Johnny Carson's "Tonight" show, you'll relish this tribute, which is produced by "Great Performances" and hosted by Mr. Carson. 
Classic film clips, interviews with other Hollywood legends, touches of humor and wry commentary, private photographs and home movies -- it's got everything. 

   Saturday, March 14, 10:05-11 p.m. EST, on HBO (other play dates include March 17, 20, 23, 26 and 29): "Tina Turner: Break Every Rule." 
Rhythm-and-blues lovers, sit up and take notice. 
Instead of cavorting on a huge stage before a zillion fans, Ms. Turner performs in a small European club with some powerful musicians behind her: Alan Clark of Dire Straits, and up-and-coming blues singer Robert Cray. 

   Sunday, March 15, 9-11 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Silas Marner." 
George Eliot was well acquainted with the isolation and misery of life in rural England before the Industrial Revolution, and this film of her novel renders those conditions with near-sickening realism. 
Furthermore, Ben Kingsley is depressingly convincing as the misanthropic Marner, a weaver who lives only to count his gold. 
Stay with this film, however. 
Like poor old Marner's miserly soul, it finds redemption in the end. 

   Mondays, March 16-May 4, 8-9 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Adventure." 
David Fanning -- former executive producer of the PBS series "World" and creator of "Frontline" -- grew up on the coast of South Africa with an adventurer father. 
So he admires the sort of people who sail small boats across big oceans, fly balloons over the Himalayas, drive dog sleds into the trackless Arctic and dangle from enormous mountain peaks. 
Now he has turned that admiration into a series of impressive films. 

   Monday, March 16, 9-10:20 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Tom Peters: The Power of Excellence, the Forgotten Customer." 
Another batch of exemplars from the man who claims to know everything you ever wanted to know about business. 
This time his kudos are going out to firms with reputations for excellent customer service. 

   Monday, March 16, 9-11 p.m. EST, on NBC: "In Love and War." 
After forging a career playing weirdos and sad sacks, James Woods finally gets to play a real hero -- Naval Commander James Stockdale, the Vietnam War's highest-ranking POW. Mr. Stockdale, today a retired admiral living in California, was imprisoned for eight years, while his wife helped organize POW families in this country. 

   Wednesday, March 18, 8-9:20 p.m. EST, on PBS (8:30-10 p.m. EST, on WNET/Thirteen): "Minelli on Minelli: Liza Remembers Vincente and His Films." 
You say the previously mentioned Jimmy Stewart special didn't satisfy your appetite for Hollywood nostalgia? 
Well, you're in luck. 
This extravagant memorial has all the same ingredients, and more. 
There's only one drawback: 'Tis the season to "Celebrate Public TV" -- and, as David Letterman says, "We all know how painful that can be." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
