ID: 266	RANK: 35	SCORE: 19.692595
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861204-0073 </DOCNO>
<HL> Chernobyl, Eastern European Drought
Hobble Soviet Bloc's Electricity Output
---
By Bill Paul
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/04/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
UTILITIES (UTI) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The Soviet Union and its allies face a winter electricity crisis that threatens to cut industrial production and force further restrictions on residential lighting, U.S. analysts say. 

   The serious power shortage also worries U.S. officials because it apparently has caused the Russians to restart the Chernobyl nuclear complex without promised safety improvements. 

   Eastern Europe is always short of power. 
But this year, U.S. experts say, the shortage may reach crisis proportions primarily because of April's accident at Chernobyl. 
Chernobyl represents about 2% of Soviet electricity capacity and is an important source of power for two Eastern bloc countries, Hungary and Bulgaria. 

   The accident came on top of a two-year-long drought in Eastern Europe that has disrupted hydroelectric-power generation. 
And a November fire at a 1,500-megawatt hydroelectric power station in Soviet Azerbaijan made matters worse, causing severe electrical shortages in the region. 

   To keep up with demand, the Soviets and their allies ran oil, coal and other conventional power plants full blast during the summer, normally a time for plant maintenance. 
Now, even with Chernobyl partially back in service since September, U.S. analysts say that the Eastern bloc mightn't have enough power for high winter power demands and could be in dire straits if the unmaintained equipment breaks down. 

   "If the winter is harsh, the situation could get very serious," says Jan Vanous, research director for PlanEcon Inc., a Washington-based center for Soviet and Eastern European economic analysis. 

   Problems already are occurring. 
Hungary, for instance, had to shut down some factories during a particularly cold stretch in September. 
Moreover, the Soviets and their allies haven't been able to maintain the designed frequency of 50 hertz in the electricity grid that connects their countries. 
At times the frequency has dipped as low as 49 hertz, Western observers say. 
A decline to 49 or 48 hertz could burn out the electricial motors in thousands of factories and damage computers and other sensitive equipment, says an official of the Electric Power Research Institute, the U.S. utility-industry's research arm in Palo Alto, Calif. 

   "The quality of their power is deteriorating, affecting the amount and quality of industrial production," says Judith Thornton, an economist at the University of Washington who specializes in studying the Soviet electrical system. 

   Ms. Thornton adds that in the Soviet Union, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania, "It's possible that a lot of people are going to be sitting around in the dark." 
Poland, Czechoslovakia and East Germany shouldn't be seriously affected, other experts say. 

   But, while the Soviets have to worry about industrial production, the U.S. is concerned about another nuclear accident. 

   "Our best estimate is they started Chernobyl back up probably too soon to do all the (safety) upgrades they said they'd do, and some will have to be added later," U.S. Energy Secretary John Herrington recently told a Senate subcommittee. 

   William J. Kelly, a specialist on Soviet energy at Battelle Laboratories in Columbus, Ohio, says, "The Soviets haven't been able to do much retrofitting (at Chernobyl). 
Whatever defects that were in units three and four (the ones where the accident occurred), are still in units one and two," the ones apparently back on line. 

   Adds Mr. Vanous of PlanEcon: "The Russians have been under severe pressure because of Chernobyl. 
They've had to get it working again even though there may be risk" of another accident. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
