ID: 266	RANK: 38	SCORE: 19.429495
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870423-0081 </DOCNO>
<HL> Chernobyl: Coping With Consequences
---
Foreign Insight:
'Glasnost' Is Also a Victim of Chernobyl
As Propaganda Move Rises From Ashes
---
By Mark D'Anastasio
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
UTILITIES (UTI) </IN>
<DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The international firestorm that followed the nuclear accident at Chernobyl gave birth to glasnost, Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of openness. 
But one year later, the Soviet leadership seems incapable of applying the new principle to the aftermath of the disaster. 

   After an initial effort at candor, the Kremlin has launched a powerful propaganda campaign aimed at squelching the public's fears about the long-term consequences of Chernobyl, the worst nuclear accident in history. 
One Soviet intellectual says the official explanations are as "unrealistic and full of wishful thinking as a Russian fairy tale." 

   But by suppressing the truth at a time when the populace's fears about radiation are mounting, officials are demonstrating their inability to curb the old Russian impulse to take a strictly paternalistic approach toward what individuals need to know. 
They are also undermining glasnost -- and thereby threatening to destroy Mr. Gorbachev's carefully cultivated image as a new breed of Soviet leader. 

   At the very least, skepticism toward the rosy picture being painted by officials is likely to deepen an ingrained cynicism that is impeding Mr. Gorbachev's campaign for social and economic renewal. 

   Authorities stepped up their campaign to hide the true dangers of Chernobyl in early March as dozens of small rivers that course through the 18.5-mile-wide evacuation zone around the nuclear plant began overflowing from the thaw of record winter snows. 

   Not surprisingly, people worried that radiation-contaminated soil would be carried off into the Dnieper River Basin that provides drinking water for millions of people in the Ukraine. 
Thousands of anxious letters from mothers and fathers in the area poured in to Soviet newspapers. 

   Officials responded that newly built filtering dikes would hold back all radionuclides, the invisible radioactive particles scientists say will remain "hot" for decades or even centuries. 
Ukrainian Health Minister Anatoli Romanenko declared "there are no grounds whatsoever for worries or apprehensions." 

   And as the floods subsided, Vasily Tkach, minister of water conservation, likewise proclaimed that all was well. 
"The Dnieper's waters are now suitable for drinking and the picturesque banks for sport and play," he said. 

   More soothing words followed as strong spring winds blew radioactive dust onto farm fields and pastures. 
While Western scientists warned that consumption of contaminated water, milk, and food will account for 90% of post-Chernobyl radiation exposure, officials in the Soviet Union dismissed health fears as a psychological neurosis. 

   "We observed certain elements of radiophobia," a Kiev health official said on a radio program. 
"A certain proportion of the people are limiting intake of milk and fresh vegetables, considering they may be contaminated." 
He advised listeners to forget their fears, as the real threat to their health was the "distortions in their diet," depriving them of vitamins and minerals. 

   Anxiety over the long-term threat of death from cancer from radiation exposure is also being met with a don't-worry line. 
According to Leonid Ilyin, chairman of the National Commission for Radiation Protection, of the 237 people diagnosed one year ago as suffering from acute radiation sickness, 28 have died while "the overwhelming majority of victims have returned to work." (Western experts put the number of radiation deaths at 29). 

   As for the 930,000 people examined for the effects of exposure, Nuclear Power Industry Minister Nikolai Lukonin said, "I can officially say that no deviation from the norm was found in any case, including newborn babies who stayed in the area of Chernobyl." 

   Over the long term, Mr. Lukonin told Ukrainian newspapers, 600 cancer fatalities at most will result from the nuclear accident. 
He and other officials have rejected as fabrications estimates by Western specialists that as many as 75,000 people world-wide could die. 

   (In Moscow yesterday, Soviet officials told a news conference that most people in the Chernobyl area are in good health and that radiation levels in farm products and soil near the plant have almost returned to normal. 
They also said that the lowering of the reactor temperature is going according to plan.) 

   Despite the propaganda barrage, Western diplomats in Moscow say glasnost isn't a complete failure. 
One of its goals was to make bureaucrats more accountable for their deeds -- and Soviet newspapers have been reporting cases of managerial malfeasance that permitted the Chernobyl fire to happen at all. 

   But glasnost has clearly failed to achieve its other grand purpose: to bring the truth to the people. 

   Mr. Gorbachev himself recently urged Soviet journalists to show greater respect for the intelligence of average Soviet citizens. 
To fail to do so could only damage their morale, he said. 

   "Any untruth gives rise to a painful reaction and affects a person's social feelings," Mr. Gorbachev said. 
"There's no getting away from this." 

   In the Ukraine, the Chernobyl catastrophe is certain to bring more hardships. 
Just as inevitably, the contrived explanations of what's happening will trigger the painful reactions that the inventor of glasnost finds so troubling. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
