ID: 266	RANK: 4	SCORE: 26.065765
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870423-0068 </DOCNO>
<HL> Chernobyl: Coping With Consequences --
East, West Move Toward Safer Reactors,
But Experts Warn More Must Be Done
---
By Richard L. Hudson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST EUROP GOVMT
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
UTILITIES (UTI) </IN>
<DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The trauma of Chernobyl spurred governments in both the East and the West to take steps to improve the safety of nuclear power. 

   But experts warn that more needs to be done -- especially in the Soviet Union. 

   So far, the Soviet Union has started to repair and modify all Chernobyl-type reactors. 
And officials in West Germany, the U.S., Sweden and other Western countries are probing plants to make sure that concrete-and-steel "containment" buildings surrounding reactors are leak-proof and that the entire plants are "idiot-proof." 
The Chernobyl accident, after all, was triggered by a series of mistakes by ill-trained control-room workers. 

   Nuclear-industry executives insist that the Chernobyl reactor was so different from Western-designed reactors that the accident doesn't necessitate any safety changes in the West. 
Not surprisingly, nuclear critics contend that what happened at Chernobyl simply proves that all nuclear power plants are unsafe. 
Regardless of who is right, nuclear regulators say that convincing the public of the safety of nuclear plants is now at the heart of the industry's survival. 

   "As far as the public is concerned, the accident was a shock" that prompted politicians in many countries to hesitate to buy new plants, says Morris Rosen, safety director of the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, or IAEA, a United Nations body. 
To keep growing, he says, "the nuclear industry has to prove its safety now." 

   In Germany, regulators who even before the Chernobyl accident had been considering ordering utilities to install new vents in some of the containment buildings last month issued such an order. 
If an accident occurs, the vents could let off excess pressure to prevent the buildings from bursting and unleashing a radioactive cloud. 

   In the U.S., the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, or NRC, speeded up consideration of proposals to strengthen the containment buildings of 24 older U.S. reactors. 

   The NRC also is considering commissioning Chernobyl-related research into the basic physics of reactors. 
The Chernobyl reactor and its 14 Soviet cousins work on so unusual a principle that the accident couldn't be precisely replicated in the West. (The only similar Western reactor, a military plant at Hanford, Wash., was closed last year for repairs in the post-Chernobyl uproar.) 
But the end result -- a sudden, uncontrollable surge of nuclear fission that blows the lid off -- conceivably could happen in the West, and some scientists are urging new studies to prevent such accidents. 

   After Chernobyl, "we have to make double sure that there's no possibility of a reactivity accident occurring," says Theo Theofanous, an NRC consultant and a professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara. 

   Also needing more study is the containment building, argues James Joosten, a researcher at the IAEA. 
The Chernobyl containment sealed only part of the reactor. 
While Western structures cover the entire reactor, Mr. Joosten argues that they have gaps, such as pipe outlets, through which radiation could leak in an accident. 
Rather than "putting distance between our designs and Chernobyl," he says, "the nuclear industry has a responsibility to look for parallels and lessons to be learned." 

   The Soviets have learned plenty. 
They've begun a costly, three-year program of repairing Chernobyl-type graphite-moderated reactors. 
In these reactors, nuclear fuel rods are inserted into holes in a huge block of graphite that helps control the nuclear reaction. 

   The Soviets have told the IAEA officials that they are putting safety systems under lock and key, so they can't be switched off without permission, and they've installed devices to prevent reactor control rods from being withdrawn too far. 
Both were factors in the Chernobyl accident. 
Also, the Soviets are gradually refueling their reactors with a more expensive, but safer, uranium mixture. 

   But most Westerners think the Soviet Union still has a long way to go. 
The safety steps mitigate the design flaw that helped cause the Chernobyl accident -- but they don't eliminate them. 
Soviet engineers still aren't planning for as broad a range of accidents as Westerners are. 
And there are worrisome signs that Soviet building materials may be unsound. 

   Says Byron Lee, executive vice president of Chicago-based Commonwealth Edison Co. and chairman of a U.S. industry committee that studied the Chernobyl accident: "They've improved the safety margins, but I don't think anybody in this country would be satisfied with what they've done." 

   ---

          Chernobyl: The Disaster and Its Aftermath
   April 25, 1986, 1 a.m. -- Staff of Chernobyl reactor No. 4
begins planned test of an emergency power system.
   April 26, 1:23 a.m. -- Reactor power surges
uncontrollably. Building explodes.
   April 27 -- Evacuation of nearby residents begins.
Reinforcements arrive from Moscow for 14-day effort to
control reactor. Monitors in Finland and Sweden detect
unexplained surge in radiation.
   April 28 -- Moscow confirms a nuclear accident has
occurred.
   May 3 -- Radioactive fallout stretches across Europe,
causing widespread health fears.
   May 6 -- Reactor comes under control and most radiation
leakage ends.
   June 18 -- Moscow reaffirms plans to double its nuclear
power production by 1990.
   Aug. 25-29 -- Soviets attending International Atomic
Energy Agency conference in Vienna give first detailed
account of accident, blaming design flaws as well as operator
mistakes.
   Aug. 31 -- Last reported radiation death from Chernobyl.
In all, 31 have died, 29 of radiation and two of injuries at
the plant.
   Sept. 9 -- South Korea goes ahead with plans to order new
reactor. Later, China and Britain order new nuclear plants.
   Sept. 22 -- Massachusetts governor blocks start of
Seabrook, N.H., nuclear plant, citing Chernobyl.
   Sept. 29 -- Soviets restart first of three undamaged
reactors on Chernobyl site.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
