ID: 266	RANK: 77	SCORE: 17.923136
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870423-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> Chernobyl: Coping With Consequences
---
Lingering Fallout:
A Year Later, Mishap
At Chernobyl Damps
Atom-Power Industry
---
Siemens Plant-Building Unit
Battles Germany's Greens,
Seeks to Reassure Public
---
In Britain, Cuddly Reactors
---
By Richard L. Hudson and Terence Roth
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP FREST
NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)
UTILITIES (UTI) </IN>
<DATELINE> ERLANGEN, West Germany  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    Meeting over lunch, some
restaurant owners in this small Bavarian city finish their
fruit tarts, order more beer, then fall silent. Joachim
Martin stands up to talk to them -- about Chernobyl.
   Nuclear power is safe, says Mr. Martin, the senior radiologist at nearby Kraftwerk Union AG, a big German nuclear-plant builder. 
Despite scare stories, he reassures them, the radioactive fallout from Chernobyl wasn't that bad in Germany. 
It is safe to eat the local vegetables, drink the milk and serve the mushrooms, he adds, and anyone worried about wild game can marinate it a few days in vinegar to cleanse it. 

   "I don't, of course, want to defend or color this," Mr. Martin says. 
"Radiation in food isn't nice. 
But we shouldn't overdramatize the circumstances." 

   His calming lecture is one of hundreds delivered in the year since the April 26, 1986, nuclear accident in the Soviet Ukraine spewed radiation across Europe for more than a week. 
The fallout revived anti-nuclear movements world-wide and stirred a political backlash that the nuclear industry has been forced to combat. 
"As far as the peaceful use of nuclear energy is concerned, Chernobyl was a calamity, a plague that will afflict it for a long time," Kraftwerk Union says. 

   At KWU -- a unit of the West German electronics giant, Siemens AG, and one of the world's biggest nuclear-plant builders -- a special task force immediately ordered engineers to simulate the accident on computers to see whether KWU's own designs needed improvement. 
Company radiologists measured the fallout. 
Salesmen tried to reassure jittery customers. 
Publicists prepared an intensive, pro-nuclear campaign, buying newspaper ads, lecturing civic groups and distributing tons of literature. 

   Similar rear-guard actions to forestall further damage to the industry began throughout the West. 
In the U.S., industry groups used ads and press handouts to describe technical differences between Soviet and Western plants, to show that a Chernobyl couldn't happen in America. 
In Britain, the Central Electricity Generating Board is trying to give its reactors a new, cuddly image. 
At its plants, it has advertised open houses and organized motorcycle races, band concerts and "fun runs" for children. 
Visiting the local reactor is presented "as a day out" with the family, a spokeswoman says. 

   Such campaigns, and a year's time, have made Chernobyl a distant memory in some countries. 
China, South Korea, France, Britain and Japan have resumed ordering plants. 
Industry economists continue forecasting a steady, slow expansion of nuclear power world-wide. 

   But U.S. anti-nuclear groups, citing Chernobyl, continue to block operation of new reactors at Shoreham, N.Y., and Seabrook, N.H. 
And in most European countries -- including Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Sweden and Finland -- plans to expand nuclear power will remain politically taboo for some time. 
For all, the accident's toll was too great to forget quickly. 
It cost the U.S.S.R. the equivalent of more than $3 billion, killed 31 Soviet citizens and injured at least 200 more, and it increased cancer risks for thousands of people in Eastern and Western Europe. 

   In many Western countries, says Anton Peisl, KWU's executive vice president for commercial and financial affairs, "it might take five years to get over the political effect of Chernobyl." 

   That is bad news for nuclear-plant builders. 
Orders already were scarce before Chernobyl, as electricity demand slackened along with economic growth and as cheap oil, natural gas and coal made the atom look pricey. 
U.S. utilities haven't ordered a new plant since 1978, and the first- and second-ranking plant builders in the West -- Westinghouse Electric Corp. and General Electric Co. of the U.S. -- have had to hunt abroad for new civilian orders. 
This month, the No. 3 builder, France's Framatome S.A., announced diversification plans and set aside about $330 million to invest in non-nuclear businesses. 

   KWU ranks fourth in the business but was hardest hit by Chernobyl because its most important North European markets caught the heaviest fallout. 
The resulting political uproar temporarily disrupted sales campaigns in many countries. 
In the end, KWU didn't lose any existing orders, and most sales negotiations have resumed -- leading KWU officials to say the accident's ultimate financial impact has been minimal. 
However, Dutch and Finnish officials shelved their purchase plans for two to four years, while sales prospects in Switzerland remain in doubt, KWU officials say. 
Those are costly disappointments, as KWU values each plant order at $1.7 billion to $2.2 billion. 

   At home in Germany, the company became a target of a protest campaign, spearheaded by the Greens, the environmentalist party, to close existing nuclear facilities. 
"Grab hold of the {nuclear} sickness at its roots," proclaimed German environmentalist leaflets last December for a demonstration at KWU gates. 
"We will not let KWU out of our sight." 

   When first word of the accident arrived in Germany -- two days after it occurred -- it was just a remote foreign news story. 

   "My first reaction was it's far away, and we know nothing about the plant," recalls Otto Gremm, KWU's plant-safety director. 
But two days later, Chernobyl's drifting radioactive cloud had reached southern Germany, sparking a national neurosis about radiation. 
Contaminated or not, swimming pools and sandboxes were emptied, and suspect lettuce and milk were seized. 
A torrent of conflicting, confusing health advisories flowed from government, environmentalists and news media. 

   At KWU, finely calibrated radiation detectors inside buildings went off as employees tracked in fallout on their shoes. 
One KWU physicist, panicked by news reports, ripped out his vegetable garden and scraped off the topsoil to protect his family. 
With employee concerns growing, the KWU works council, a type of labor committee common in German companies, sought reliable health information from the radiology department. 
Inside and outside KWU, Chernobyl was hitting home. 

   Conferring by telephone, KWU directors organized an Arbeitskreis Tschernobyl -- a team of eight managers to coordinate the company's response. 
It included Mr. Gremm, the safety boss, plus the chiefs of radiology, research and public relations. 

   The team's most urgent task was to learn whether Chernobyl would suggest any safety flaws at KWU-designed plants. 
The initial paucity of information from Moscow impeded the work and increased the public's fear. 
In a kind of sleuthing, engineers ran the few clues available through computers to guess what happened and ponder its implications for KWU. 

   Because the Soviets said the plant was on fire, the first surmise was that oil might be burning and that perhaps the flames had broken through to the reactor area and released radiation. 
KWU engineers rechecked their own fire-prevention systems but found no flaws, Mr. Gremm says. 

   Further news from Moscow revealed a more serious problem: The fire was in the reactor's graphite core. 
KWU had once adapted a Soviet reactor for export to Finland, and its physicists knew that Chernobyl-type reactors were more fuel-efficient but less controllable than most Western ones. 
The hypothesis eventually developed by KWU was confirmed in August when the Soviets finally explained what happened: Through operator error, the reactor had become unstable, and fallback safety systems had been inactivated. 
Because of the design differences, KWU concluded that its own plants don't need repairs. 
So far, German regulators agree. 

   Outside Germany, KWU salesmen were trying to calm jittery clients. 
In the Netherlands, Switzerland and Finland, politicians were putting construction plans on hold, disrupting KWU sales talks. (The company still hopes for contracts in those countries.) 

   In Egypt, where KWU was bidding to build a plant, local managers gave state officials the Chernobyl analyses produced by Mr. Gremm and his colleagues. 
The reports were aimed at reassuring the Egyptians of KWU's own plant safety. 
The KWU engineer in Egypt, Kurt Pfeiffer, joined forces with his competitor, the local Framatome agent, to discuss Chernobyl with Egyptian regulators and explain their own safety methods. 
"We felt it was a time not to fight each other," Mr. Pfeiffer says. 
The Egyptians were reassured and have resumed construction plans. 

   Meanwhile, some 15 KWU radiologists were roving southern Germany and measuring fallout. (German adults received radiation doses from Chernobyl of 50 to 110 millirems last year in addition to the natural radiation of 150 to 200 millirems; scientists disagree over the extent of the extra health risk.) 
The radiologists' mission was partly goodwill, helping local officials track the radiation. 
One radiologist joined a regional government task force responsible for issuing public-health advice. 
The radiological data also was used in a works-council leaflet to assure KWU employees that they weren't in danger. 

   KWU publicists, meanwhile, grappled with a political nightmare. 
Chernobyl was winning new adherents for the anti-nuclear Greens party. 
The main German opposition party, the Social Democrats, was turning against nuclear power as well. 
Demonstrations grew violent. 
Police and protestors battled with water cannons and slingshots at a fuel-recycling plant. 
Later, a planned demonstration at KWU's gates was banned after police found a cache of Molotov cocktails. 

   To fight back and protect KWU's future, its publicists churned out pro-nuclear brochures and window stickers. 
They booked KWU employees into several hundred speaking engagements, promoting nuclear power to politicians, church organizations and police groups -- an important audience, KWU officials say, because the police defend plants from demonstrators. 
To reach children from Argentina to Japan, they mailed thousands of classroom kits to build your own model reactor out of cardboard. (It takes 90 hours to assemble.) 

   They planned a $2.7 million ad campaign in German newspapers. 
Each ad, under the slogan "Safety Is Our Ground Rule," pictured a KWU employee extolling the safety and importance of nuclear power. 
One showed a smiling worker holding a soccer ball, as a homely illustration of the "ball-like safety container" surrounding reactors. 
Anti-nuclear activists lampooned it with an ad showing a collapsed soccer ball. 

   KWU's campaign continues. 
Its publicists are considering new ads that would directly attack the Greens. 
The company scored a major victory earlier this month, when voters in the German state of Hesse ousted the governing anti-nuclear coalition of Social Democrats and Greens; that eliminated a closure threat to local KWU plants. 
But the Greens are attacking KWU plants in other German states and plan another demonstration at KWU's headquarters May 2. 
They also are helping organize a nationwide electricity boycott this Sunday, the Chernobyl anniversary. 
They call it "a national referendum against atomic energy." 

   Politics aside, KWU's most important challenge now is to find new orders. 
With or without Chernobyl, KWU hasn't sold a new nuclear plant since 1982 and has been living partly off a backlog of orders in Germany, Spain, Argentina and Brazil. 
Mr. Peisl, the KWU executive vice president, says he is confident of getting new orders -- but when or where isn't certain. 
KWU is discussing a potential $500 million consulting contract in China. 
And it is having informal talks with the Soviets about advising them on their post-Chernobyl nuclear program. 

   But although financially secure as a unit of cash-rich Siemens, KWU has plenty of trouble ahead. 
It will work through much of its plant-order backlog in four years, and although it expects new orders, it will take time for work on them to begin. 
The early 1990s, Mr. Peisl says, may be "a thrifty period" for KWU; in preparation, the company is trimming its work force about 5% annually. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
