ID: 266	RANK: 93	SCORE: 17.569084
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880325-0180 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Health Effects of Chernobyl Fallout </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> NUK UTI ENV </IN>
<TEXT>
   Washington state would like to respond to comments made in a recent article "Jump in 1986 Death Rate Sparks Dispute: Did Chernobyl Cause Surge in U.S. Mortality?" (Feb. 8). 
This article noted a large increase in deaths in the summer of 1986, particularly in Washington and California, which received relatively high doses of iodine-131 from the Chernobyl fallout. 
Increases in infant mortality rates also were noted for these states. 

   A closer look at Washington state death data shows a somewhat different picture. 
While the number of total deaths did increase in the summer of 1986, this increase amounted to only 2% above the previous summer, not the 5% quoted in the article. 
Furthermore, this increase is not all that unique. 
The number of deaths occurring in the summer has increased every year between 1983 and 1986 and preliminary data indicate that the number of deaths has increased again in the summer of 1987. 
In addition, contrary to the findings noted in the article, the infant mortality rate actually decreased by 5% compared with the previous summer. 

   A still closer look at the data shows that much of the increase in the summer of 1986 was confined to five causes: infectious disease, arteriosclerosis, chronic lung disease, suicide and diabetes. 
Focusing on a single narrow cause such as Chernobyl serves only to divert attention away from the complex mixture of culprits that leads to death (including life-style factors, societal problems and environmental pollutants). 

   While it is important to look at changing mortality patterns with a spirit of inquiry toward finding solutions, it is equally important to look beyond preliminary numbers to ensure that the solutions are real, recognizing that certain words, once said, will be remembered long after the rejoinders are forgotten. 

   Patricia Starzyk
   Washington State Department of Social and Health Services
   Vital Records Data Services Unit
   Olympia, Wash.
   ---
   Stuff and nonsense, is the only way one can summarize a scientific response to the allegations that the Chernobyl accident might have affected U.S. mortality in the summer of 1986. 
The story is a classic nuclear Chicken Little. 
In science, there is a need to substantiate cause and effect; just showing a correlation between two random events (in this case, an odd distribution of U.S. mortality statistics and the Chernobyl accident) doesn't mean anything. 
After all, when the rooster crows the rising of the sun follows -- primitive peoples might conclude that the former caused the latter, but we know better. 

   As for the fallout from Chernobyl having any effect on the U.S. population, there is an overwhelming body of international scientific evidence from some 60 years of research supporting the contention that the tiny levels of radioactivity in the U.S. resulting from Chernobyl could not cause increased U.S. mortality. 
At the most fundamental level, one must observe that the U.S. population is continually exposed to thousands of times more natural radioactivity, in widely varying amounts. 
If the levels of radiation associated with Chernobyl fallout in the U.S. had any discernible health effect, then the vastly higher radiation exposures we received from many natural sources should have proportionately larger effects on health, large enough in fact to be obvious to the casual observer without need of statistical divining. 

   John W. McKlveen
   Nuclear Environmental Engineer
   Arizona State University
   Tempe, Ariz.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
