ID: 266	RANK: 96	SCORE: 17.490494
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880204-0092 </DOCNO>
<HL> Futures Markets: Gyrations in Agricultural Prices Tied To Rumors of Soviet Nuclear Mishap </HL>
<AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> CMD PCS </IN>
<TEXT>
   Rumors of a nuclear accident in the Soviet Union threw agricultural futures into a tizzy for the second time this week. 

   Prices of livestock, grain and sugar futures jumped at the open of trading after a report by Sweden's national news agency of a Soviet nuclear accident. 
The report quickly deteriorated amid denials by the nuclear regulatory community and the Soviets. 
Many commodities turned mixed by the middle of the session. 

   "It was like a 'War of the Worlds' broadcast," said one grain trader. 

   The volatile reaction underscores the uneasiness of the markets almost two years after the Soviets' Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster. 
Many traders scrambled to buy back contracts for fear that prices would soar if an accident damaged an agricultural region. 

   "Everybody remembers Chernobyl," said Victor Lespinasse, a grain floor broker with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago. 
"A lot of sellers just pulled out of the market." 

   In the sugar market, the nuclear rumors almost staved off a seventh-straight decline in prices, though prices eventually closed marginally lower. 

   The rumors were a "weird coincidence" with what happened during Chernobyl, said Judith Weissman-Ganes, analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. Similar to the time of the Chernobyl disaster, the sugar market has been falling after the fizzling of a rally caused by expectations of Soviet buying. 

   Rumors the Soviets were selling gold and buying wheat helped precious-metals prices plunge. 
But analysts said the heavy Soviet gold selling, though at a bad time for the weakening gold market, wasn't necessarily tied to a nuclear disaster. 

   On Monday, a rumor of a nuclear-waste spill in the Soviet Union ignited a similar wave of short-covering and pushed up some futures prices. 
It turned out that a Soviet freight train had dumped chemicals near a river. 

   U.S. commodity markets are ripe for rumors about Soviet agricultural problems because the Soviet Union is the world's largest importer of wheat and the second-largest importer of feed grains, said John Urbanchuk, an economist at Government Research Corp., Washington. 

   "If anything does happen to its supply situation, it potentially means a big jump in their grain demand," he said. 

   Agricultural-futures prices staged a frenzied climb during the Chernobyl accident on speculation that the Soviet Union would have to widen its exports if any farmland was radiated. 
As it turned out, the accident caused only a blip in Soviet farm production. 

   What's more, the Soviet Union is reemerging as a big consumer of U.S. grain. 
It will probably buy at least 6.8 million metric tons of U.S. wheat for the 12 months ending September -- the most since 1984, said Christian Foster, a Soviet expert at the U.S. Agriculture Department. 

   Some traders speculated that the Soviet Union moved quickly to squelch the Swedish news report for fear it would boost the price of grain on the world market. 

   By the close of trading, it still wasn't clear what, if anything, had happened in the Soviet Union. 
Late in the day, confusion mounted when U.S. Energy Secretary John Herrington told reporters at a previously scheduled New York Mercantile Exchange briefing that Swedish monitors had registered "an incident rather than an accident" with a Soviet nuclear facility. 
The Energy Department later corrected his statement and said it had no indication of any incident or accident. 

   Most commodities were moving higher late in the day on different news. 

   Cattle and hog futures closed higher on speculation that a Midwest snow storm will slow weight gains, and that the Agriculture Department will report a 2% drop in the U.S. cattle population Friday. 

   Wheat futures moved higher on rumors that the Soviet Union is close to another round of wheat buying in the U.S. Soybean prices rebounded, after falling earlier in the week amid projections for a record soybean harvest in South America. 

   In other commodity markets yesterday:
   PRECIOUS METALS: Deflated by the disappearance of inflation worries, heavy selling from the Soviet Union and a lack of investor demand, gold prices fell $15.20 an ounce in heavy trading on the Commodity Exchange in New York, to a nearly seven-month low of $438.70 an ounce. 
Platinum prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange also skidded. 
The withering of the traditional premium of platinum over gold continued to worry analysts; such an occurrence typically indicates long-term weakness in precious-metals prices. 
Speculative demand also eases under such conditions. 
Analysts also attributed some of gold's weakness to heavy selling by investment groups in Saudi Arabia, whose economy has been battered. 
"This hasn't happened just all of a sudden," said William O'Neill, research director at Elders Futures Inc., New York. 
"The growing perception that we're headed to a deflation/recession scenario and the dollar giving every appearance that it has in fact bottomed is overwhelmingly bearish for precious metals." 
But Jeffrey A. Nichols, president of American Precious Metals Advisors Inc., said inflation statistics and expectations in coming months could edge higher again -- "not much, but enough to re-excite gold investors." 

   ORANGE JUICE: Forecasts of a possible freeze in Florida -- which would be the major citrus state's first this season -- sent futures prices skyrocketing. 
Traders are jittery because Florida has had six freezes in the past eight seasons. 
On the New York Cotton Exchange, the price of the March contract soared 7.1 cents to $1.7695 a pound. 
Analysts said the exchange recently reported a large number of short positions held by speculators betting the market would fall, so reports of a possible freeze caused heavy buying as those traders scrambled to cover their positions. 
James Roemer, meteorologist for Weather Trades Inc., Des Moines, Iowa, said that while "it's too early to say for sure," there could be a freeze in Florida's citrus area early next week. 
"There's a 50-50 chance of it being 24 to 29 degrees Tuesday or Wednesday in central and northern Florida," he said, adding: "The weather had been great all year." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
