ID: 214	RANK: 39	SCORE: 9.371393
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881103-0157 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Bookshorts: Yeager Out-of-Doors; Kids Everywhere </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   When Chuck Yeager uses the phrase, "the right stuff," he's talking about the way golden trout tastes when you cook it over an open fire with wild onions, pulled fresh out of the ground. 
In "Press On: Further Adventures in the Good Life" (with Charles Leerhsen, Bantam, 247 pages, $17.95), he confesses that he still doesn't know what Tom Wolfe meant by the phrase when he made it the title of his best-selling book about pilots. 
"Tom Wolfe made a lot of money off it, but it's not something I've ever heard a pilot say." 

   Still, Tom's a nice guy, says Mr. Yeager, though maybe a bit too abstruse: "I never understood a lot of what he was driving at. 
Once, a few years ago, he sent me a bunch of his books to read, but I never got past the titles, they were so weird. 'Velvet Gloves and Mauve Something' was one, I think. 
I prefer Louis L'Amour any day." 

   Mauve doesn't fit into the color scheme of Mr. Yeager's life. 
Blue, brown and green are his shades, though the plane he broke the sound barrier in was orange. 
"Press On" is mostly a series of fun and exhilarating stories about Mr. Yeager in the out-of-doors. 
The best chapter is the first, in which he describes his life-long love affair with a mountain range, the Sierra Nevada. 
"My annual trip into the Sierras is now the central event of my life," he says. 
Once he took relaxing camping trips in those mountains, time off from the exhaustion of flying, but now his journeys have become more rugged, with 18-mile-a-day hikes up bloodying terrain, and only what dinner you can catch. 
"They have evolved into more like military missions," Mr. Yeager writes. 

   Mr. Yeager savors his paradoxes: that his vacations seem like slave labor, that pain and challenge are resources out of which his happiness is made, that killing animals is consistent with environmentalism, rightly understood. 

   He is really advocating a lifestyle in this book more than systematically recording a life. 
He has not led a model existence -- restless and independent, he apparently didn't have much time for his young children -- but it has been a great life for storytellers, both for Tom Wolfe and for himself. 
"Press On" is cleansing reading for those of us stuck with lives too much dominated by those Mauve Somethings. 

   ---
   The funniest comic strip these days is "Calvin and Hobbes" by Bill Waterson. 
It is about a six-year-old terror named Calvin -- a little maniac the way we all hope we were as six-year-olds. 
His best friend is a tiger named Hobbes, though when other people are around, Hobbes turns into a stuffed tiger doll. 

   The genius of "Calvin and Hobbes" is that it captures kids the way they authentically are, not as the cute little creatures adults see -- the ones who say the darndest things. 
It is not perverse in Mr. Waterson's view that a little boy would have a tiger for a buddy; it is perverse that other people would see this tiger as a rag doll. 
For Calvin the world of make-believe is the real world. 
The annoying part is that it keeps getting interrupted by the world of grown-ups. 
First thing you know a giant prehistoric monster has risen from the ocean, heading for power lines, leaving a trail of destruction in its path. 
The monster comes upon its archrival Megalon and spews out a mighty ball of fire. 
Next thing you know, Calvin's mom is chasing him back up the stairs, trying to get him back in the bathtub. 

   Literati complain because best-seller lists are dominated by books of comic strips. 
If they are all as good as "The Essential Calvin and Hobbes" (Andrews &amp;McMeel, 255 pages, $12.95), you will be hearing no complaints from me. 

   ---
   For the little maniac in your life, the New York Public Library produces a list of the year's 100 best children's books. These are a few of the books from the 1988 list:
   --"Company's Coming" by Arthur Yorinks (Crown, $11.95). 
A zany story about visitors from outer space. 
Ages 28. 

   --"Dinosaur Bob: And His Adventures with the Family Lazardo" by William Joyce (Harper &amp; Row, $12.95). 
A creature from Africa becomes star of the local baseball team. 
Ages 2-8. 

   --"Two Bad Ants" by Chris Van Allsburg (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95). 
Two ants, searching for magic crystals, show children the world from their vantage point. 
Ages 2-8. 

   --"The Year of the Perfect Christmas Tree: An Appalachian Story" by Gloria Houston (Dial, $12.95). 
While her father serves in World War I, a girl honors his promise to provide a Christmas tree for their village. 
Ages 5-8. 

   --"Mossflower" by Brian Jacques (Philomel, $15.95). 
A fantasy adventure about woodland creatures who battle a cruel wildcat queen. 
Ages 8-12. 

   --"Hominids" by Helen Roney Sattler (Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard, $15.95). 
A nonfiction journey through the fossil record. 

   --"Canterbury Tales" by Geoffrey Chaucer (Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard, $15.95). 
Four of the tales adapted into modern prose for children. 

   -- David Brooks
</TEXT>
</DOC>
