ID: 214	RANK: 43	SCORE: 9.297866
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870527-0068 </DOCNO>
<HL> Thundering Skies:
Military Pilot Training
Stirs Uprising in West
Against Noisy Flights
---
Sonic Booms Shake Homes,
Helicopters Buzz Indians
And Radiation Is Feared
---
Laser Burns on Dead Cattle?
---
By Peter Waldman
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN>
<DATELINE> DIXIE VALLEY, Nev.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It is dawn, and Edward Robbins sits guard on his front porch, scanning the desert sky. 

   "There's one," he shouts. 
A silver Navy jet screams along the valley rim, then suddenly veers skyward as if to evade an enemy, unfurling a resounding roar onto the valley floor. 
The Robbins ranch house shakes, the china clatters inside. 

   "See what we put up with," complains Mr. Robbins, a 53-year-old former Air Force mechanic. 
"Easterners just can't fathom the vistas, the solitude we have out here. 
But where does it say that because I chose this way of life, they have the right to destroy me?" 

   In a paradox of peace, the U.S. military is waging mock war in the American West. 
The armed services, their arsenals augmented by the Reagan defense buildup, have intensified their training activities and greatly expanded their presence in Western states. 
With airspace above one-fifth of the continental U.S. designated for special military use -- up from one-seventh a decade ago -- many Westerners feel besieged by their own defenders. 

   "They're carving up the West so each branch has its own sandbox," asserts Mr. Robbins. 

   Anti-military sentiment is mounting, especially among rural residents. 
Nothing riles them more than the noise barrage from supersonic jets bursting through the sound barrier at 750 miles per hour and helicopters whirring over their homes. 
Here in western Nevada, residents blame sonic booms from Navy jets for damaging homes, causing heart attacks and making pregnant cattle abort. 
Ranchers also suspect that some mysterious incidents, possibly involving laser beams, are linked to top-secret weapons experiments. 

   In Utah and South Dakota, Indians accuse fighter pilots of buzzing their villages and sacred lands, spoiling religious ceremonies that require total silence. 
On Arizona's Papago Indian Reservation, certain sonic booms so unnerve a mentally retarded boy that he cowers all day in a basement and cries, according to his mother. 

   Rural New Mexico residents, meanwhile, say that the Air Force played "mathematical games" in assessing the environmental impact of a proposed supersonic flight-training area. 
And in Texas and Nebraska, citizens' groups have fought military plans to build radar stations that would emit microwave radiation. 

   On these and other fronts, the armed services are battling against coalitions of such unlikely allies as peace activists, environmentalists, miners, ranchers and Indians. 

   At the same time, the services still enjoy widespread support in the West, where military spending buoys many small-town economies. 
Most rural Westerners are veterans themselves and favor a strong U.S. defense. 
But many maintain that the services should share training areas and coordinate exercises to reduce their environmental impact. 

   The military, for its part, contends that the complexity of modern weapons and the growth in the nation's global defense commitments justify the proliferation of training activities in the West. 
The Navy under President Reagan, for example, has adopted a bold maritime strategy that calls for an all-out air and sea attack on the Soviet Union's Arctic submarine bases if war breaks out in Europe. 
Any such strategy, defense analysts say, requires meticulous planning and intensive training. 

   "Our business is bombing," asserts Capt. Richard Toft, commanding officer of the Fallon Naval Air Station at Fallon, Nev. 
"What good does it do to train at 250 knots when every two-bit Third World air force in the world flies supersonic?" 

   Donald Nonella's business is ranching. 
To his consternation, the Navy has turned the airspace above his pasture into a supersonic approach route for one of its bombing ranges. 
The whine and sonic booms from low-flying jets, he says, make ranch life intolerable. 

   "They seem to like flying right at you, and they're arrogant as hell about it, too," says Mr. Nonella, a self-described "conservative" in cowboy boots, red bandana and ten-gallon hat. 
"I've had planes blow smoke through my front door." 

   Here in Dixie Valley, residents have endured as many as 136 sonic booms a day. 
They angrily point at the damage from the sonic barrage: broken windows, cracked walls, even a mobile home dislodged from its foundations. 
The Navy halted all supersonic flights over the valley in 1985 until it could buy out the unhappy landowners. 
But Mr. Robbins and others have refused to sell. 

   They complain that Marine helicopters mounted a terrifying raid on their settlement one night, hovering at window level to shine spotlights into their homes. 
They also accuse a Navy pilot of launching a ground-hugging missile that just missed a school bus. 
The Navy confirms the nocturnal raid but denies having any such missile mishap. 

   Two years ago, two Navy F-18 jets bombarded a nearby ghost town with 500-pound bombs, hitting an old mineshaft, according to valley residents. 
The mine caught fire and burned for several days. 
A Navy spokesman says that the pilots, just in from Florida and unaccustomed to "everything looking so brown," mistakenly overran their target. 

   "It's been a living hell," says Beverly Washabaugh, a horsebreeder who lives near the ghost town. 

   Just as troubling for her and her neighbors is a bizarre series of incidents. 
Ira "Hammie" Kent, a Stillwater, Nev., rancher, says that one of his "buckaroos," or cowboys, was setting coyote traps in the nearby mountains last year when the metal devices suddenly became too hot to handle, the man's hair stood on end and his horse "went plum crazy." 
Mr. Kent believes the incident, which lasted two or three minutes, may have been connected to some sort of high-energy weapons experiment. 

   Two years ago, Mr. Nonella's buckaroo found four dead cattle lying in a straight line one mile long, their chests and bellies pocked by some sort of lesions. 
Mr. Nonella swears the marks were burns, conceivably from a laser gun, but a state veterinarian concluded that the carcasses were too decomposed to know for certain. 

   Capt. Toft says that the Navy is extremely careful about using laser-guidance systems and denies that any kind of weapons research is going on at the Fallon base. 

   No matter what he and other officers say, many rural Westerners believe that the military just doesn't care what happens to them. 
"Their only concern is destruction," asserts Ed Robbins' wife, Ruth, who founded a group called Mothers Against Military Arrogance, or MAMA. 
She cites the Navy's stance on sonic booms. 

   Medical studies dating back to the early 1970s show that repeated exposure to sonic booms of much lower intensity than those over Dixie Valley can cause hearing loss, nervous disorders and heart attacks, Mrs. Robbins says. 
Yet, the Navy's 1984 draft environmental-impact report on its Fallon-based supersonic operations suggests that "long-term public health data could be collected to test for possible health-related associations" with sonic booms. 
Such data on local residents, the report says, "could be useful in providing a sound basis for future planning and decisions." 

   Fumes Richard Bargen, a Gabbs, Nev., physician: "The Navy basically said, 'OK, we know what happens if you run into a brick wall at 60 miles per hour. 
Now let's see what happens if you run into a brick wall at 120 miles per hour.'" 

   Many ranchers maintain -- and the Navy disagrees -- that sonic booms and other jet disturbances are causing cattle to abort or abandon their calves to die. 
One Nevada rancher reports a 10% drop in his herd's annual breeding rate in two years. 

   James Johnson, a rancher in Belle Fourche, S.D., says that the proliferation of low-flying bombers from nearby Ellsworth Air Force Base has disrupted the grazing of his cattle and sheep, costing him extra money in livestock feed. 
Mr. Johnson says that he and his neighbors are gathering data for "dropping a bomb" on the Air Force -- a lawsuit to stop the overflights. 
"There's no use trying to reason with those miserable pups," he says. 

   Indians also feel increasingly beset by the military. 
Low-level Air Force flights over South Dakota threaten to spoil the revival of traditional Sioux religion, say members of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe. 
Phyllis Young, a Sioux mother, says that when two of her boys went into the Black Hills last summer for their "hanblechiya" -- four days of solitary dancing and fasting in a quest for a religious vision -- they were buzzed by jets and harassed by hovering choppers. 

   "The military tells me it's just curiosity on the part of the pilots," she says. 
"I don't care what it is. 
It's preventing us from practicing our religion." 

   An Air Force spokesman insists that aircraft from Ellsworth and other bases "don't buzz people." 
The Air Force studies extensively the impact of low-level flights on residents, livestock and wildlife before it inaugurates any training routes, he says. 
Livestock easily adapt to jet noises, he adds. 

   While many Westerners are angry and frustrated these days, a few succeed in thwarting military activities near their homes. 
Marcus Henderson, a mechanical engineer, confronted the Air Force about microwave radiation from a giant radar station proposed for a hill overlooking his town, Christoval, Texas. 
He was concerned about possible genetic damage and other health effects. 
The Air Force, he says, assured townspeople that the site would operate at the same "average power" level as a large FM radio station. 
But he calls the comparison "intentionally misleading." 

   "Most radio stations operate continuously, yet they glossed over the fact that the radar site would only transmit one percent of the time," he says. 
"So the average output of microwave radiation didn't look so bad, but the peak values would have been very high." 

   Mr. Henderson's findings helped turn residents against the project. 
After they hired an environmental lawyer, the Air Force decided to build elsewhere. 
"The system works pretty well if you've got a well-prepared complaint and enough money for a good attorney," he says. 
"But if we had been poor sharecroppers, no way." 

   The system seems to work particularly well for those who aren't daunted by technical data. 
Steven Rothman, a computer scientist in Catron County, N.M., went through a stack of Air Force documents on a proposed pilot-training area. 
"The environmental impact statement was so intimidating and filled with mathematical games, I don't think they thought anyone would ever read it," he says. 

   Mr. Rothman discovered that the Air Force had based certain environmental-impact calculations on a "maneuvering ellipse" constituting just one-tenth of the airspace slated for supersonic flights. 
Armed with that fact, Catron County officials wrung from the Air Force a concession that effectively negated the area's value for aerial dogfights and other exercises. 
The Air Force has yet to use the area. 

   Despite such local disputes, the armed services can count on broad public support in the West. 
Many towns, reeling from low prices for oil, minerals and beef, have embraced military projects as vital pump-primers for their economies. 
"We want to make the Air Force part of our community," says Mayor Robert Helmer of Belle Fourche, home of a new electronic facility for monitoring bombing runs. 

   In Fallon, the Navy is halfway through a three-year expansion and modernization program that is expected to provide local businesses with an estimated $120 million in contracts. 
The base, with a payroll of more than $20 million, is the area's largest employer. 

   The armed services, moreover, can muster good reasons for expanding their activities. 
The Navy, for one, maintains that the computerized training ranges around Fallon give pilots indispensable cockpit experience. 
At the southern end of Dixie Valley, for instance, pilots often negotiate an electronic warfare range studded with hidden antiaircraft missile sites. 
Instead of missiles, the sites fire radio beams at the attacking jets, with computers keeping score of hits and misses. 

   "If you're going to ask these boys to risk their lives for their country," says Capt. Toft, "you owe them facilities like this for training." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
