ID: 214	RANK: 97	SCORE: 8.245673
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871215-0170 </DOCNO>
<HL> Business World:
AMR's Prescription for Air Travel's Ailments
---
By George Melloan</HL>
<DD> 12/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AMR
AIRLINES (AIR) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Robert L. Crandall has built American Airlines into one of the soundest properties in the airline industry. 
Now he is undertaking an even tougher task, leading the industry's push for modernization of the U.S. airport and air-traffic-control system. 

   The stakes are high. 
If the air travel support system doesn't keep up with the rapid expansion in air travel, Mr. Crandall fears retrogression back to the economic regulation that did so much to retard the industry's earlier development. 

   At the Dallas-Fort Worth headquarters of AMR Corp., AA's parent, CEO Crandall defines the problem: "We're 20 years behind the times in the air-traffic-control system, and we're not catching up. 
If anything we're getting further behind. 
We're failing to build airports, we're failing to build runways, we're failing to get national noise standards, we're failing to use the most current technology and we don't have, unhappily, a management structure at the FAA {Federal Aviation Administration} that can get the job done. 

   "Now, that's not a commentary on the people at the FAA. 
The FAA people are OK but unless you can get some kind of a structure that can cut itself loose from the annual budget cycle, with some incentive to do good long-range planning and an administrator who has a reasonable term, you're not going to get the job done." 
The FAA's 1981 modernization plan is far behind schedule. 
An advanced automation system, with new computer software and work stations for controllers, isn't due for delivery until 1993. 
That is not nearly soon enough in the industry's view. 

   Mr. Crandall argues for a new government corporation that would function much like a private company but draw its revenues from the user fees already levied on the air-travel industry. 
"You would continue to have a public-interest presence. 
You've got an independent funding source. 
The corporation could make its own personnel rules, its own service standards and so on and so forth." 

   A consensus along those lines may be developing among aviation interests but it has not fully jelled. 
"Some guys in the industry want to spend all their time arguing about the trust fund {where, theoretically, user fees are set aside from other federal revenues and earmarked for air-system use}. 
The trust fund is a phony issue. 
There is no trust fund. 
If you want to get this done politically, the best way not to get it done is to go to the government and say, 'We want to set this up privately but, by the way, you've got to give us the accumulated trust money.' 
You've killed the whole deal, because the government can't give that to you without putting itself another $4 billion in the hole in next year's budget. 

   "My view is, forget it. 
Saw off the trust fund. 
Forget it ever was. 
From day one we'll take the flow of user fees and run this thing." 

   American's position paper, titled "Fix the System," estimates that U.S. commercial carriers will haul some 433 million passengers this year, 62% more than the 267 million carried in 1978. 
By 1995, the number is expected to soar another 44%. 
While the paper focuses on longer-range needs, it also details fixes that could be made quickly. 
For example, the FAA should have utilized a "farm" system in low-traffic areas and simulators to train badly needed controllers faster. 

   A national noise standard is important because local interests have effectively blocked airport development. 
The federal government has been reluctant to set standards because it doesn't want to assume noise damage suit liabilities. 

   Interestingly enough, one simple measure pushed by American with little resistance from the government already has reduced delays. 
It was simply the Department of Transportation requirement that airlines report on-time performance. 

   "Reliable flight times were always achievable," says Mr. Crandall. 
"It was simply a matter of how much schedule time you allowed." 
When the industry was required to make on-time performance public, there was suddenly an incentive to adopt more realistic schedules, even at some extra operating cost. 

   Commercial airlines, many of which were ambivalent a decade ago about the merits of deregulation, are today relatively solid in their opposition to restoring federal regulation of routes and fares. 

   "I was not a proponent of deregulation in the first place but I think, looking back, it has worked better than I thought it would work," says Mr. Crandall. 
"If it had not been marred by certain kinds of excesses it would have worked very well indeed. 
Two of the excesses were that the government approved far too many mergers. 
We have now got excessive levels of concentration at certain airports. 
There also were clear excesses on some of the labor issues, particularly in the Continental-Texas Air bankruptcy. 
These things are destabilizing the industry to a point where we may get some re-regulation. 
I think if we get it, it is going to be an adverse development." 

   Flight delays and the misperception of increased safety risk fuel the re-regulatory movement. 
"The safety risk is quite modest and the service-level issue is to some extent historical. 
It was much worse in the spring than it is today. 

   "But you have the delay syndrome and the perception of some in the Congress that relates frequency of service and price to small airports -- and just the general uproar, some of the things the free marketplace does. 
Non-refundable tickets, for example. 
With other things, you don't have to say they're non-refundable. 
You can't return an automobile, or a theater ticket or most of the things you buy. 
But you try to make an airline ticket non-refundable and everybody comes off the wall." 

   One barrier to industry consensus is the continuing struggle between private owners and pilots and the commercial airline industry over use of facilities. 
Mr. Crandall thinks the private owners are "on the wrong side of this thing. 
The public wants safe operations. 
The public is willing to say, 'sure everybody can use the air-traffic-control system, but, if you create risk, I want you out.' 
The problem is that among the ranks of private pilots there are some obvious amateurs. 
They fly airplanes that aren't properly instrumented. 

   "I think the AOPA {Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association} would be a lot better off if they said, 'OK, we agree. 
We want to go forward but we insist that money and facilities for reliever airports be part of the package.' 
To which we would say, 'Bravo! 
Build a whole bunch of reliever airports and let all the GA {general aviation} go in and out of those reliever airports.' 
All we want is to say: 'Look, in the air space where commercial airplanes operate, we don't want anybody flying who doesn't have a properly instrumented aircraft and proper training.' 
There's a lot of GA that meets those tests. 
All the corporate aircraft and some of the private aircraft." 

   Mr. Crandall is not making any bets on how soon, or even whether, his ideas for modernizing the air-travel infrastructure might find their way into public policy. 
All the people who don't want to take anything out of government will be opposed. 
The airline industry itself is fragmented, with some companies, such as TWA and Pan AM, in a state of flux and everyone seeking a stronger position. 
But at least the plan itself makes a lot of sense. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
