ID: 271	RANK: 45	SCORE: 15.337895
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870731-0117 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Music Appreciation in a Modern Key
---
By Andrew Ferguson</HL>
<DD> 07/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Pamela Des Barres's "I'm With the Band: Confessions of a Groupie" (Beech Tree Books, 304 pages, $16.95) is well summed up by what high-school comp. teachers used to call a topic sentence, which appears on page 63. 
Since most people who make a stab at this memoir of "the ultimate groupie" won't get that far, I reprint it here in full: "When it came right down to it, rock and roll groups were my life." 

   By page 63, however, this admirably direct sentence is altogether unnecessary. 
Already Mrs. Des Barres has described how, as a teen-ager, she peeped through the windows of the Rolling Stones' hotel room, hid in the foliage outside a bungalow rented by the Beatles, rolled around a dance floor with Frank Zappa, and swooned under the moonlight with Captain Beefheart. 
She has, moreover, delivered plenty of testimony as follows: "I merged with their music like it was beating through my bloodstream" -- this about Iron Butterfly! 
Surely anybody who was able to merge with "In-a-gadda-da-vida" as it beat through her bloodstream deserved to be the ultimate groupie. 

   Born in Hollywood and raised during the '60s in the San Fernando Valley, Mrs. Des Barres was perfectly situated by time and place to claim her title. 
She was also, in the lingo of the '80s, a fabulous-looking babe. 
And, in the rock 'n' roll biz, good looks, particularly when bestowed on a girl a few years shy of the age of consent, is tantamount to a gold-plated backstage pass. 

   Gifted thus, young Pamela from Reseda merged into the Hollywood nights, and the bulk of her narrative becomes a strictly chronological, flatly told tale of how she hopped and tumbled her way across the gamut of celebrities, always taking care to land on her back: from Rod Stewart, Jim Morrison, Mick Jagger and half of Led Zeppelin, all the way down to the son of Soupy Sales and the caretaker of Marlon Brando's house -- even Rod Serling and Tiny Tim make appearances along the way. 

   Although the good Lord granted Mrs. Des Barres the gift of beauty, He was much skimpier when it came to a sense of irony, mere smidgens of which might have lifted her vulgar kiss-and-tell to at least the level of entertainment. 
When, as she often does, Mrs. Des Barres quotes her exhaustive personal diary -- she must have lugged the thing from bedroom to bedroom like a contraceptive device -- you get the uneasy feeling that she sees nothing amusing or even hokey in the flower child revealed by it. 
She still thinks her vows to "tear down the gates of hate" in this "plastic world" actually made sense. 

   No less dispiriting is her lack of discrimination. 
Mrs. Des Barres was the doormat to the stars. 
Stripped of its lush descriptions of enhaloed rockers and prodigious physical encounters, "I'm With the Band" is a harrowing account of broken promises, aggressive infidelity, unparalleled debauchery -- all the familiar male cruelties in other words, amplified here by fame, money and young Pamela's willingness to let the little snots get away with it. 

   And sure enough, after each TKO Pamela picks self up, dusts self off, and has at it yet again, in a stunning display of masochism. 
She at least has been lucky; she's alive, while a very large number of the colleagues, friends and lovers who appear in her book have modulated themselves into rock 'n' roll heaven. 
True to her era, however, Mrs. Des Barres forgoes drawing any conclusions that might be taken as "judgmental." 

   As the '70s progressed, she began feeling like a "floundering, faded Jezebel . . . 
The rock and roll girls were getting younger, and I was no good at competing." 
She was, after all, almost 25 years old, and yearned to be a homebody. 
Her prince finally appeared in the form of Michael Des Barres, at the time the lead singer for a band called Silverhead. 
She was smitten at once: "He was a degenerate drug-taking sex-dog toting two bottles of Southern Comfort. . . . 
He didn't take many showers, and his teeth were all chipped from banging them into the microphone." 

   Despite his undoubted merits, Pamela still had her doubts about Mr. Des Barres -- he ate too much sugar, for one thing, and there was the matter of a sexually transmitted disease that he picked up in Japan. 
But she heaved her caution overboard when at last she saw Mr. Des Barres stride the boards; the highlight of his performance came when he removed a small plastic hammer from the back pocket of his silver lame pants and struck the heads of the girls in the front row, singing, "I'll bang you, baby, with my heavy, heavy hammer." 

   With this Pamela was a goner. 
"Michael was the first man who let me be me; in fact, he let me become me. . . . 
I got to shine like a pornographic stained-glass window instead of groveling at his feet." 
By book's end -- it just sort of stops -- they are married, he is off drugs, and she has performed the unhappy duty of letting her countless old boyfriends know she is no longer available. 
As it happens, none of them seemed to mind all that much. 

   ---
   Mr. Ferguson is assistant managing editor of the American Spectator. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
