ID: 271	RANK: 79	SCORE: 13.449574
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880706-0138 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Records: Rock Replay: When Oldsters Top the Charts </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jim Fusilli </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Eric Clapton's new album, "Crossroads," is a 73-song anthology of the 25-year career of one of rock's icons. 
Clapton was God to blues-loving Brits in the mid'60s, a brilliant guitarist in the original supergroups, Cream and Blind Faith, and leader of Derek and the Dominoes. 
As a luminous and commercially successful soloist, Clapton has attained a status that permits him to lean on a legend that's rarely challenged. 

   But "Crossroads" does in fact challenge the legend. 
It's an expose that shows Clapton hasn't grown much as an instrumentalist, that, as a singer, he's devolved into a crooner. 
He's now satisfied easing his way through formulaic pop songs and is rarely willing to risk a blistering guitar solo. 
"Crossroads" shows, with few exceptions, that Clapton's best work is some 15 years behind him. 

   That may explain why the six-album boxed set is nearing million-seller status. 
In rock, nothing sells like comfortable, unchallenged legacy. 
Today's charts are littered with rockers whose best work took place at least a decade ago. 
A quick look at a recent issue of Rolling Stone magazine shows 12 of the Top 50 best-selling albums were recorded by acts who'd fit that description; only Bruce Springsteen's "Tunnel of Love" album presents a veteran artist equaling his best work. 
Further, three other Top 50 albums are film soundtracks that contain old songs: In other words, almost a third of rock's 1988 best sellers are steeped deeply in its past. 

   And the bulk of new, mainstream rock is a virtual replay, closely patterned after its predecessors, augmented by new computerized drum tracks, electronic keyboards and digital-recording clarity. 
The hot group 10,000 Maniacs sounds like the Fairport Convention of the late '60s; current metal groups such as the Scorpions, Def Leppard and Kingdom Come are retreads of Led Zeppelin; today's Tiffany and Debbie Gibson sound like any of a dozen previous bubble-gummers; and Terence Trent D'Arby resuscitates memories of Otis Redding, Stevie Wonder or Smokey Robinson, depending on the song. 
It's all so calculated; there's little emotion, scant craft and, the wit of theft aside, no creativity. 

   But so what? 
Today's rock radio favors "classics." 
For new acts looking to break through, the best advice is, try to sound as if you played the Woodstock Festival. 
More so than ever, rock is old stuff. 

   It's unlikely to change easily. 
Rock's audience isn't getting younger: Thirty-five-to-59-year-olds, the natural targets for classic repackages and lackluster efforts by '60s favorites, soon will outnumber the 18-to-34-year-olds in America. 
This target group spends on rock: For the first time since the early '50s, the majority of record buyers are more than 25 years old. 
Also, high-end electronic equipment -- compact disks and CD players and, soon, digital-audio tape and DAT players -- brings an older, more affluent audience to the record shop. 
There's little evidence this audience is interested in new music, in rock as an ongoing, vital art. 
A list of best-selling rock CDs in Billboard magazine is even more slanted toward dinosaurs than Rolling Stone's list, which includes vinyl albums, cassettes and CDs. 
This portends a plausible nightmare: Rock lovers will spend the rest of their lives listening to the same two dozens acts culled from the same, tired palette of sound. 

   The two bulwarks protecting us against the onslaught of tired rock are MTV, the cable rock-video network, and college radio. 
MTV, for all its giggling smugness, diligently plays new acts. 
College radio playlists are dotted with exciting, obscure artists, much like those at album-oriented rock stations in the '60s and '70s. 
The few fresh new acts that have dribbled into the mainstream this year -- Sinead O'Connor, Tracy Chapman -- first built a core audience among college-station listeners. 

   But MTV and college radio reach only a small part of rock's aging audience, which seems to prefer an artist like Clapton who's fallen into formula, as "Crossroads" shows. 
The collection is top heavy: It begins with Clapton exploring the blues with the Yardbirds and John Mayall, shifts to show his bright inventiveness with Cream, and peaks with the passionate fire of the Dominoes material. 
What follows largely is a meandering collection of commercially successful pop. 
The rare biting moments culled from post-1975 sessions -- a nasty live "Double Trouble" or the guitar work in the oddly mixed "Miss You" -- point up the lack of spark in the remaining cuts. 
In the package's extensive liner notes, Rolling Stone senior writer Anthony DeCurtis calls today's Clapton a "laid-back troubadour" and says the 43-year-old guitarist has left behind innovation, drug addiction and heartbreak -- to settle down. 
"The calm that he felt at his core finally entered his music," Mr. DeCurtis observes. 

   Maybe that's the gentlest way to say the fire is gone. 
And rock without passion, without something new and challenging, isn't worth the trouble, even if it's produced by a legend as gifted as Eric Clapton and dressed up in a boxed set. 

   ---
   Mr. Fusilli is a free-lance writer in Hasbrouck Heights, N.J. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
