ID: 104	RANK: 25	SCORE: 12.782330
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890907-0060 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890907 </DD>
<AN> 890907-0060. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
@  Film: Kindness Amid the Nazi Horror
@  ----
@  By Julie Salamon </HL>
<DD> 09/07/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<TEXT>
   Poland's Roman Catholic Primate Jozef Cardinal Glemp isn't doing his Solidarity friends a favor by reviving the image of the Jew-baiting Pole. 
Raising the old bugaboo about Jewish control of the media while slamming Jews protesting the presence of a Carmelite convent at Auschwitz, Cardinal Glemp seems to have forgotten what happened to Jews there, just a short drive from Krakow. 

   Jews aren't about to let him forget the Nazi mass murders of their people, and that's right. 
It's their moral obligation, but they also must devote energy to memorializing the noble non-Jews who risked their lives to protect Jews. 
One of the few films to deal with the subject was "Au Revoir Les Enfants," the lovely 1988 movie by French director Louis Malle -- a Catholic -- about his memory of a rural priest who eventually was deported to a concentration camp for hiding Jewish boys in his school. 

   A great many Holocaust survivors can report isolated incidents of kindness and bravery like the one Mr. Malle recalled in fictional form. 
Far rarer was what happened at the little French village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, where an entire town conspired to save Jews. 
Now Pierre Sauvage, a 45-year-old Jewish film maker who was born near Le Chambon, and spent his early months there, has commemorated the place and its people in an understated yet stirring documentary called "Weapons of the Spirit." 

   Mr. Sauvage's parents wanted so badly to forget the past they didn't raise him as a Jew. 
Yet after he discovered that his family was Jewish, at the age of 18, they did take him to visit Le Chambon. 
When he returned in 1980, intending to make a documentary about the Allied decision not to bomb the railroad tracks leading to Auschwitz, he decided instead to tell about what happened in Le Chambon, about what he calls "the conspiracy of goodness." 

   He doesn't insult Le Chambon's down-to-earth residents with sentimental treatment though he clearly feels passionately about what they did for him. 
Most of the villagers who harbored the Jews have died; the rest are old and seem slightly bewildered by Mr. Sauvage's intentions. 
When he asks an elderly couple why they helped, they shrug. 
"I don't know," says the white-haired woman. 
"We were used to it." 
Another villager says: "It happened so naturally we can't understand the fuss." 
Finally: "It's a normal thing to do." 

   Of course in Nazi-occupied France -- Le Chambon was 40 miles from the Vichy border -- saving Jews wasn't the "normal" thing to do. 
It was abnormal -- dangerous, life-threatening. 

   Mr. Sauvage provides the background that explains the overwhelming casualness with which the Chambonnais viewed their actions. 
They, too, are outsiders, Huguenot Protestants living in Catholic France who had themselves experienced isolation and persecution hundreds of years before. 
When the old woman said, "We were used to it," she probably was taking the long view. 

   Mr. Sauvage mixes up the imagery of Le Chambon today, a quaint provincial town, with photographs from the Nazi era. 
He fills in the historical context with words and with old news footage of Vichy France, including a cheerful account of an exhibit called "The Jew in France," which explained in detail "the harmful effect of the Jew in France." 
More than 13,000 people visited the exhibit in three days, the announcer declared. 

   The numbers may or may not have been true. 
In Le Chambon, where Jewish refugees arriving in the middle of the night were never asked what their religion was, the propaganda was irrelevant. 
Under the guidance of their pastor, Andre Trocme, these fundamendalist Christians practiced what Trocme preached. 
They loved their neighbors. 
By the war's end, the town's population included almost one Jew for every one of the 5,000 locals. 

   Mr. Sauvage, too, took his cue from Pastor Trocme, who encouraged his congregation to use "weapons of the spirit" to fight evil. 
He rousted other Jewish beneficiaries of Le Chambon's spirit to speak on film about how they were saved. 
Many of them had never acknowledged the good that had been done them, because they couldn't bear to remember the accompanying sorrow. 
In his capacity as film maker and the president of a charitable foundation called Friends of Le Chambon, Mr. Sauvage is performing a valuable function. 
He's reminding us that while the evil shouldn't be forgotten, neither should the good. 

   ---

   Playwright Willy Russell's "Shirley Valentine" has greatly pleased audiences in London and New York with the idea that all a bored, middle-aged British woman needs to resuscitate her marriage is a quick roll in the sand with a bartender on a Greek island. 
Mostly the piece gave Pauline Collins, with her droopy doll's face, a chance to work lots of charm with the play's zippy one-liners and sit-com philosophizing. 
Transferred to the screen, Ms. Collins remains charming, even playing against the odd spectacle of Tom Conti's flabby Greek beach boy. 

   ---

   VIDEO TIP: Louis Malle, best known in this country as Mr. Candice Bergen, has made two fine and entirely different films about the Nazi occupation of France. 
His 1974 "Lacombe Lucien" was a chilling investigation into the banality of evil, about how a rough farm boy became a vicious Nazi collaborator simply because he couldn't get a job with the local resistance. 
More recently, with "Au Revoir Les Enfants" (which is available on videocassette), he returned to an incident in his own history, to the time he spent in the rural Jesuit school where his Parisian parents shipped him to sit out the war. 
Though the film is about the boys, the movie's hero is the school director who defied the Nazis by harboring Jewish children. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
