ID: 139	RANK: 14	SCORE: 17.595840
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881115-0084 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Sports: Mediocrity's the Word Around NFL </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Denver  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Politics has its Misery Index, which combines unemployment and inflation to gauge how well or poorly off we the people are. 
A similar measure can be applied to the National Football League. 
Call it the Mediocrity Index, if you will. 
It measures how many teams are within a game of .500, a workable definition of the common stew. 

   A perusal of the standings at the cessation of hostilities Sunday revealed 11 of the 28 NFL teams to have been mediocre after 11 weeks, sporting won-lost records of 6-5, 5-5-1, 5-5 or 5-6. 
If that figure holds for the season as a whole, it would be the third highest of this decade, trailing only 1983's 16 and 1981's 12. 
That would make it a better than fair-to-middling year for mediocrity. 

   As the winter winds begin to sting the nose, the identity of the mediocre is as interesting as their number. 
The rank includes the defending Super Bowl champion Washington Redskins, who were embearrassed on Sunday by Chicago, 34-14, in their own park, to drop their record to 6-5 and imperil their chances for a repeat. 

   The ever-popular San Francisco 49ers find unexpected mediocrity gravy on their jerseys as a result of a Sunday beating by their old neighbors, the Los Angeles Raiders. 
Four of the five teams in the American Conference's Eastern Division qualify. 
So do the Seattle Seahawks, who haven't been getting their Boz-worth out of their much-injured linebacker, Brian. 

   But whether your MI glass is half full or half empty depends on your perspective. 
The Denver Broncos, party of the second part in the past two Super Bowls, were smiling ear-to-ear over their 6-5 record at dusk here Sunday, while the Cleveland Browns were in the dumps over the same numbers. 
That's because the Broncos had just gobbled up a plateful of turnovers to dump the Browns, 30-7, and boost their playoff hopes at the Browns' expense. 

   The last time these two teams met, the only "m" word anyone was using was "marvelous." 
That was last season's AFC championship game in Mile High Stadium. 
The Broncs won it, 38-33, but not before the Browns had come back from a 21-3 deficit and were an Earnest Byner stride from a tying, last-minute touchdown before a fumble thwarted them. 
Given the run of recent Super Bowls, it wouldn't have been a bad idea to end the season right there and decide the league champ by ballot. 
Alas, they played the thing, and Washington beat the Broncs in a 42-10 ho-hummer. 

   Cleveland impressed enough to become a lot of people's pre-season title choice, and to put its tall quarterback, Bernie Kosar, on many a magazine cover. 
Storky Bernie, however, was casualty No. 1 in this year's quarterback injury plague by sustaining a sprained knee in game one, and spent the next six leaning on crutches while his mates relied on stout defense (the best in the conference before Sunday) to acquire a 4-3 mark. 

   Kosar returned on Oct. 23 and led two victories, causing the Lake Erie faithful to joyfully conclude that all was well. 
But the bad-boy Houston Oilers whopped the Browns country-style a week ago Monday night, and the Broncos followed suit Sunday. 

   Not surprisingly, the supposed after-effects of the bruising administered by the Oilers came up frequently in the losers' dressing room here. 
Cleveland coach Marty Schottenheimer declared it had "absolutely nothing" to do with the latest setback, but some of his troops demurred. 
"We could have been a little drawn out from that game," said defensive end Carl Hairston. 
"They hit pretty hard." 

   The situation on the Broncos' side was a bit different. 
This gang had managed to retain a scrappy, underdog image while compiling the AFC's best regular-season record over the 1983-87 campaigns (54-24-1) and winning conference titles the past two years. 
But, perhaps surrendering to angst, they came out flat early this season and lost three of their first four. 

   Three wins perked things up, but the team surrendered 94 points in losses to Pittsburgh (!) and Indianapolis, and had all it could do to edge a Kansas City Chiefs team that's so bad it has been denounced on the editorial page of the Kansas City Times. (Danders up, the Chiefs beat the 8-2 Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday. 
That's the kind of season it's been.) 

   "I don't know the reasons, but we weren't playing together the first couple months of this season. 
Nothing much was in synch," confirms veteran Denver guard Keith Bishop. 

   So unpromising was the Broncos' outlook (and so porous their worst-in-the-league defense against the run) that they entered Sunday's fray a three-point underdog even though they'd beaten the Browns nine straight times going back to 1974. 
Cleveland's game plan was to run straight at the Broncos' 260-pound defensive linemen, who are teeny weeny by NFL standards. 
Fullback Tim Manoa got the first call. 

   But -- oops! -- Bronco nose tackle Greg Kragen butted the ball from Manoa's hands, defensive back Dennis Smith recovered on the Cleveland 22-yard line and, in the course of time, a Rich Karlis field goal gave Denver a 3-0 lead. 
The Broncos possessed the ball six times in the first half -- four times on Cleveland turnovers -- and each time they scored. 
The Browns went oh-for-seven, and took their half-time ease on the short end of a 30-0 count. 

   The second half was pro forma, with the Denver fans amusing themselves by floating paper airplanes onto the field and the Broncos finding sport in chasing Kosar, who runs like he's on stilts. 
They caught him six times, for 35 yards in losses. 

   As usual, the Denver offensive star was quarterback John Elway, who flipped, zipped and darted as in days of yore, which is to say last year. 
It was, he said later, "a good win, maybe one we can build on. 
It was nice to have a cushion for a change." 

   In the Browns' boudoir, veteran tight end Ozzie Newsome was saying that, perhaps, adversity would rally his team where high hopes had failed. 
"Maybe we'll circle the wagons, like the cowboys did when the Indians attacked," he said. 
I considered telling him about Custer, but thought better of it. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
