ID: 139	RANK: 18	SCORE: 17.160870
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870105-0053 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Bernie and the Brown in the Pink
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 01/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Cleveland  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Federal Communication Commission well might consider taking legal action against the Cleveland Browns for misleading labeling. 
A team named the Browns has no business playing exciting football. 
The Cleveland Magentas or Aquamarines, maybe. 
But never the Browns. 

   No team named the Browns, for instance, should be able to rally from a 20-10 deficit with just over four minutes left to win a double-overtime, 23-20, victory, but that's what the Clevelanders did against the New York Jets here Saturday in an American Football Conference semifinal that had more climaxes than a Jackie Collins novel. 
Even some of the winners expressed surprise at the outcome. 

   "When we were down near the end, Bernie Kosar {the Browns' quarterback} told us not to worry, that we still had time to get it done," said Cody Risien, a veteran offensive tackle. 
"My heart said 'Yeah,' but my mind found it hard to believe." 

   So, too, did the 23-year-old Kosar, in his mind of minds. 
"Things looked bleak," he admitted in a post-game interview. 
Then again, "this team has character, and if there's a way to win, I knew we'd find it," said he. 

   Thus, the Browns will find themselves in the AFC final here Sunday against the winner of yesterday's late-afternoon Denver-New England game. 
That's the furthest they've gone in the NFL post-season tournament since 1969. 
They have had five other shots at playoff glory since then, but all have come up ashes. 
The one that hurt most came six years ago minus a day when, trailing Oakland 14-12 in below-zero weather here, their drive for a winning score was thwarted within hand-shaking distance of the goal line by an interception of a poorly advised pass by quarterback Brian Sipe. 

   The shade of that defeat haunted ramshackle Municipal Stadium on Saturday. 
"No Red-Right-88" read a fan's sign in footballese reference to that ill-fated play. 
And -- hey! -- it was "deja vu" time in the fourth quarter, when, with his team at the Jets' two-yard line and trailing 13-10, Kosar flipped a little pass into the waiting arms of Jet cornerback Russell Carter. 

   This, however, is 1987, not '81, and the 6-foot-5 Kosar isn't the shortish Sipe. 
Bernie, you might recall, was the Vinny Testaverde of 1984, leading the University of Miami team to national recognition. 
In fact, if it wasn't for Kosar's leaving the sheltering palms for the pros two years before his college eligibility ran out (he actually graduated early), Vinny might never have had his chance to shine. 

   Kosar is an Ohio boy who wanted to play for the Browns, and the team was so flattered it traded about everything but its yard-line markers to Buffalo for his draft rights. 
Last season was his first, and the team protected his tender psyche with a heavily run-oriented attack. 

   Kosar appreciates offensive balance ("I don't want to throw 50 times a game," he told his coaches), but the scanty rookie employment of his arm chafed. 
This season he has been allowed to throw more, and the Browns have prospered. 
Their 12-4 won-lost record in the regular campaign compares to 8-8 last season, and gives them the home-field advantage throughout the AFC playoffs. 

   On Saturday, however, Brown balance went out the window in the direction of the pass. 
Thwarted by the Jets' sturdy rushing defense until the overtime periods, Kosar set team records for passing attempts (64) and yards (489), and tied one for completions (33). 
In one third-quarter stretch, the Browns attempted to pass on 16 consecutive offensive plays, not including kicks. 

   Such one-sidedness bodes ill for the team's outlook in the games ahead, as Kosar well knows. 
"We did what worked today, but we wouldn't like to make a habit" of all that passing, he allowed. 

   The Browns also wouldn't like to make a habit of squandering scoring chances the way they did during this strange afternoon. 
They visited Jets' territory on 13 of their 18 ball possessions, but were able to score just five times, on two touchdowns and three field goals. 

   That was partly the fault of placekicker Mark Moseley, who missed on three of his six field-goal tries. 
One of those misses -- from just 23 yards in the first overtime -- provoked a moan from the 78,000 Brownie faithful that could have caused a seiche on Lake Erie. 
But the old-fashioned toe-firster got the winner, a 27-yarder, two minutes into OT II. 

   The real drama of the game came in the last period of regulation, though. 
The gutsy, opportunistic Jets went into the quarter ahead 13-10, and made it 20-10 with 4:14 remaining on a 25-yard run by Freeman McNeil on their first play from scrimmage after their second interception of a Kosar pass. 
Things looked browner yet for the Browns after a couple of penalties put them in a second-and-24 situation from their own 18. 

   A questionable roughing-the-passer penalty on Jets lineman Mark Gastineau got them out of that hole, however, and starting on third-and-10 from his own 33 Kosar completed six straight passes for a touchdown with 1:57 left. 
The Browns stopped the Jets on downs and took over again at their 33 with 51 seconds and no timeouts left. 
A pass interference penalty advanced the ball 25 yards and Kosar hit Webster Slaughter for 37 more to the 5. 
Moseley's 22-yard field goal tied it at 20 with 11 seconds to go. 

   In the overtime, the Browns did what they couldn't do before, which is run the ball. 
Forty five of their 75 yards rushing for the day came on their winning drive. 
"We kept dialing the same number 'til someone answered," said weary lineman Risien. 

   The day, however, was Kosar's, and everyone knew it. 
"BERNIE 1:25:87" read a balcony sign. 
That's the date of Super Bowl XXI (1/25/87), not one of those ubiquitous biblical citations. 
But if Bernie gets the Browns to Pasadena, he'll be Saint Bernard hereabouts. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
