ID: 139	RANK: 24	SCORE: 16.730633
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880119-0085 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports: A Super Semi at Mile High Stadium </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Denver  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   This is a democracy, where the majority rules, so what say we take a vote about ending the National Football League season now, sans Super Bowl? 

   All in favor of awarding the championship to the Washington Redskins, the National Conference titlists, raise your hands. 
Let's see, Jack Kent Cooke is one, Joe Gibbs is two, and those two dozen folks wearing pig snouts make it 26. 
Anyone else? 
OK. 

   Now everybody for the Denver Broncos. 
Oooh, better not get impatient, because this count is gonna take awhile. 
Two hundred twenty million and one; 220,000,002; 220,000,003 . . . my calculator just gave out. 
No matter, though. 
I think it's safe to say that the Broncs squeaked through. 

   The Denverites are the people's cherce because here on Sunday in the SB semieye, a.k.a. the American Conference final, they helped give us the kind of game we always want from a Super Bowl, but never get. 
They and the Cleveland Browns, who are growing accustomed to being the party of the second part in these gridiron affairs of the palpitating heart, posted 71 points in Mile High Stadium. 
The Broncos got 38 of 'em to win. 

   It wasn't so much how many points were scored as how. 
Denver quarterback John Elway passed, ran and even punted in as good an impersonation of Frank Merriwell as you'll see in these specialized times, and Bernie Kosar, his Cleveland counterpart, almost bested him in his own tall, cool fashion. 

   The Brownies trailed by 18 points as late as the third quarter, but came within a swipe of sending the game into overtime. 
Down 38-31, Kosar moved his team 67 yards to the Denver eight with 1:12 left in a drive reminiscent of the Elway-engineered one that set up the Broncos for an overtime win in this same event last year in Cleveland. 
The Browns' bowling-ball running back, Earnest Byner, then swept left to within a tantalizing stride of the end zone, only to have Bronco reserve cornerback Jeremiah Castille knock the ball from his grasp and fall on it at the three. 
Denver ran out the clock from there, contributing a harmless safety to the Cleveland point cache. 

   Later, in a switcheroo worthy of this out-of-whack season, the goat of that play met the press while the hero took a shower and a powder. 
"I tried to slide between two tacklers, and I felt one of them grab the ball," Byner manfully said later. 
"My first thought was to find it, but I guess somebody beat me to it." 
Castille's version of the heist will have to await Super Bowl Hype Week, because he said he ain't talking until then. 

   His stance reminds us that, anticlimactic or not, we'll have an SB, numero 22, in San Diego on Jan. 31. 
The Broncos will meet the Redskins, whose 17-10 home win over the Minnesota Vikings in Sunday's early game at least gave the nation a chance for a nice nap before the Broncos-Browns thriller. 
And who knows? 
Historical evidence to the contrary notwithstanding, it could even be a good one. 
Possibly. 

   I mean, anything's possible, especially with young Mr. Elway on the scene. 
Here's a guy who looks like he's having fun on the NFL's corporate gridiron, scratching plays in the dirt and improvising when they don't develop as planned. 
No less a throwback is the formation from which he runs many of his plays. 
They call it the "shotgun," but close one eye and you could swear it was the single-wing of Merriwell's day. 

   Elway's helter-skelter talents were displayed best Sunday in the touchdown that should have put away the Browns. 
After Cleveland had scored on its first possession of the second half to cut the Denver lead to 21-10, Elway faced a third-down and 10 from his own 20 yard line. 
He escaped two Browns tacklers, rebounded off one of his own blockers, sprinted to the right and, finally, found Mark Jackson open for a pass on the sideline five yards up field. 
Jackson, one of the Broncos' corps of small, speedy receivers, proceeded to dash 75 yards into the end zone to make it 28-10, Denver. 

   "There was the primary receiver on that play, the secondary receiver, and me," Jackson later noted. 
"But with John scrambling the way he does, there's always a chance you'll get the ball." 

   Cleveland might have packed it in right there, or earlier after an interception and fumble led to first-half Bronco scores, but it didn't. 
Instead, its Bernie-and-Earnie show took over. 
On the Browns' next possession, Kosar hit passes of 12, 30 and 32 yards, the first and third of those to fullback Byner, to pull his team to within 11 points. 
After his mates stopped the Broncos on downs, Kosar connected on three straight passes and handed off to Byner for the final four yards in another touchdown drive. 

   A Denver field goal made it 31-24. 
Kosar passed for 72 of 86 yards in a drive that tied it at 31. 
Denver got the lead back on five Elway passes from the single-wing (oops, shotgun), capped by a 20-yarder to Sammy Winder with four minutes left. 
Then the final, fatal, Cleveland thrust. 

   Byner, a rugged sort who picked up little press ink at college (East Carolina) or in four useful pro seasons, ran for 67 yards and caught seven passes for 120 yards Sunday. 
So great was his contribution that his teammates, to a man, sought to shield him from the onus of his fumble. 
"Without him, we wouldn't have been close," declared Kosar. 
The QB might have said as much for himself. 
He passed for 356 yards on the day, to Elway's 281. 

   In the contest's aftermath, the winners counted their blessings and the losers counted their disappointments. 
"I'm numb," said Denver coach Dan Reeves. 
"The good Lord smiled on us today." 
"I'm frustrated, mad, disappointed," said Browns tackle Cody Risien. 
"After last year's game {a 23-20 Denver win in overtime}, I'm beginning to think Somebody Up There doesn't like us." 

   But Risien was fan enough to acknowledge the drama and quality of the fray, and wish for a rematch. 
One would certainly be fun. 
All in favor of staging it in San Diego in two weeks raise your hands. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
