ID: 139	RANK: 42	SCORE: 15.058353
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871201-0115 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Sports: Montana the Magician
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 12/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> San Francisco  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Contrary to rumor, there will be a Super Bowl in late January, and it probably will not involve players who have lately been employed as bartenders or repo men. 
However, some difficulty is being experienced in finding teams willing to participate in the thing. 

   Thanksgiving has scarcely been digested, but already the New York Giants, last season's version of the Greatest Team Ever, are dead, no doubt the victims of collective writer's cramp from their postchampionship biography blitz. 
The Chicago Bears, the GTE of 1985-86, are winning, but are finding that a good offense isn't necessarily the best defense. 

   The National Football League's old lions -- the Steelers, Dolphins, Cowboys and Raiders -- need tooth transplants -- and the new lions -- the Seahawks, Saints, Colts and Chargers -- haven't claimed enough significant prey to roar convincingly yet. 
The real Lions, of Motor City residence, are gastly, as usual, of course. 

   One outfit, though, appears willing and able to entertain Super Bowl aspirations, or whoever else shows up. 
The San Francisco 49ers, the GTE of 1982 and '85, sliced, diced and pureed the Cleveland Browns here Sunday night to at least stamp themselves as the NFL's team of the moment. 
For the statistical minded, the final score was 38-24. 

   The NFL's determination to count the three strike-breaker games of unhappy October memory have made records and stats shaky things in this campaign, a stew of different and slightly malodorous ingredients. 
But since the show is going on, I guess we're stuck with 'em. 
The win put the Niners' won-lost mark at 9-2 (6-2 for their "real" team), the best in the NFC West division, and dropped the Browns' to 7-4 (5-3), still the best in the AFC Central. 
Just as important to the ultimate title picture, it was achieved at the expense of the league's best defense, at least as measured by the numbers the NFL is passing around. 

   The Browns' "D," which stands for both defense and their defensive unit's "Dogs" nickname, had given up the league's fewest yards and points going in. 
But it was made to jump through hoops Sunday by Joe Montana, the Niners' magician of a quarterback. 
Now there's a man for all seasons, no matter what their pedigree. 

   Montana, you'll remember, led San Francisco to its 1982 and '85 Super Bowl wins, and might have done the same in January if he hadn't missed eight games with back surgery and seen stars early on in a playoff loss to the Giants. 
Slim of build but quick of brain and foot, he is, arguably, the GQE, which stands for Greatest Quarterback Ever, although that's another subject. 

   On Sunday, before about 60,000 home fans at Candlestick Park in better weather than the baseball Giants usually get, he completed 23 of 31 passes for 342 yards and four touchdowns. 
He also ran for 43 yards that counted and, generally, ran the Browns defense ragged. 

   "We chased him, but we couldn't slow him down. 
He made it obvious why so many rank him the best quarterback around," said Browns coach Marty Schottenheimer afterward. 

   Browns cornerback Hanford Dixon, a victim of multiple burns on Sunday, was equally generous in praising his adversary. 
"That was the best I've seen a quarterback play, ever," he said. 
"It was not a Dog Day Afternoon tonight." 
Montana tamed the Browns by keeping them off balance. 
His main target was Jerry Rice, a sleek third-year man from little Mississippi Valley State College, who caught three touchdown passes Sunday on top of three the week before against Tampa Bay. 
When the Browns became too intent on stopping Rice, Montana threw short to backs Tom Rathman and Roger Craig or tight end John Frank. 

   Rice's TD catches were of two, 30 and 29 yards, and on each he reached the end zone untouched. 
Among other things, the extraordinary effort earned him some peace and quiet on the field. 
"In the beginning, the Browns were sayin' things to me, like how they were going to shut me down. 
But after I caught a few they got quiet," he related. 
"One of 'em even told me I was a hell of a player," he added with some amazement. 

   Fullback Rathman paid a similar compliment to teammate Montana. 
"It's hard to drop a pass that's right in your hands, and that's where all of Joe's were tonight," said he. 

   "What's amazing about Joe is that he almost always makes the right choice," offered halfback Craig. 
"You'll sometimes come back to the huddle thinking 'Why didn't he throw to me? -- I was open.' 
But on the film you'll see he threw to a guy who was more open." 

   Montana's Cleveland counterpart, Bernie Kosar, also found a few receivers open on the Candlestick greensward Sunday, and for awhile he helped his mates make a game of it. 
Down 21-10 with just 2:39 left in the first half, he hit six of seven passes in an especially nice drive that pulled the Browns to within four at the break. 

   The second half was all San Fran, though. 
The Niners got a 38-yard field goal from Ray Wersching in the third quarter and a touchdown that made the score 31-17 early in quarter four on Montana's 29-yarder to Rice. 
On their next possession, the Browns felt forced to go for it on fourth-down-and-one from their own 44 yard line, but linebacker Keena Turner stopped Earnest Byner for no gain. 
The Niners put it away by responding with a rushing touchdown, of all things. 

   The loss, of course, doesn't put the Browns out of the chase. 
This is a gang that led last season's AFC championship game until the last 37 seconds against Denver, and that possesses the kind of run-pass balance on offense that teams without a Montana need. 

   "I have a feeling we'll see these guys again, and when we do we'll be readier to stop Joe," said the plucky Dixon. 
"Hey, anything we do in a rematch has got to be better than tonight." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
