ID: 196	RANK: 48	SCORE: 10.832554
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881107-0146 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Toasting the Glory Days of Guzzling </HL>
<AUTHOR> Dave Shiflett </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Tastes great! 

   Less filling! 

   So goes the epic drinking debate at the end of the 20th century, and a thin dispute it is. 
Back in the weightier 1500s, Rabelais asked, "Which came first: thirst or drinking?" then proceeded to turn his belly into a bulging wine sack. 
A great man, a great talent, but maybe it's a good thing the maestro isn't around today. 
Truth told, the glory days of guzzling probably are far behind us. 

   That's one reading of Joan and John Digby's fine anthology, "Inspired by Drink: An Anthology" (Morrow, 459 pages, $24.95). A sad story it is, told by the likes of Homer, Hemingway, Chekhov, Hardy, Coleridge, Burns, Dickens, Baudelaire, Pushkin, Milton, Shakespeare and scores of others. In condensed form, it goes something like this:
   Back in the days before drinkers were heaped in with crack addicts and other drug fiends, they were a proud and defiant people. 
In fact, drinkers were rather intolerant of the puff-chested drys. 
Japanese poet Otomo Tabito (655-731) spoke for the age when he said: O what an ugly sight/The man who thinks he's wise/And never drinks sake!/Give him a good look -- How like an ape he is!" 

   The Greek poet Anacreon (582?-485 B.C.), somehow aware that his words would never come back to haunt him in a Senate confirmation hearing, was even more enthusiastic: "See! see! the jolly god appears/His hand a mighty goblet bears/With sparkling wine full charg'd it flows/The sovereign cure of human woes." (Our own national anthem, "The Star-Spangled Banner," is set to the music of an old drinking song titled "Anacreon in Heaven.") 

   Po Chu-i's "Better Come Drink With Me," a ninth-century classic, is intoxicating; had Carrie Nation read it she might have lived out her days sipping gin atop a steam grate. 

   But as time passed, the bottle busters, who have always been with us, seemed to gain the upper hand. 
"Buddha taught that a man who takes liquor and forces another to drink will be reborn five hundred times without hands," Kenko Yoshida had warned back in the 14th century. 
By and by, he was taken seriously. 
Everything turned to vinegar. 

   Whereas wine drinking had once led lads and lassies to sublime reveries, now we find Fortunado (in Edgar Allen Poe's "The Cask of Amontillado") chasing the grape into a niter-dripping catacomb, where he was shackled, walled up and left to ferment into a pile of dust. Mr. Poe (in whose destruction the grape also played a part) wasn't the only one to hang a lei of gin blossoms around Bacchus's neck: There is for example, Bertolt Brecht's description of a grog seller:
   "And his body heaves, he writhes there groaning
   Cold sweat smears his forehead like slime
   While his spongelike brain there enter
   Nightmare figures as in pantomine." 

   Modern literature is brimming with bad hooch. 
Seldom do you hear the celebratory voice of a John Clare (1793-1864), who uplifted the hearts of many when he wrote: "We'd sooner suck ale through a blanket/Than thimbles of wine from a glass." 
Instead there are Hemingway's sad drunks, and Fitzgerald's alcoholic crack-ups. 

   As "Inspired by Drink" makes clear, the modern world thirsts for affirmative voices. 
Today's best known beer advocate is a dog -- Spuds McKenzie -- and an ugly dog at that. 
And we do have Bartles and Jaymes, but they're paid psalmists for the wine cooler, a vile concoction serious drinkers consult only after they've gone through hair tonic and windshield deicer. 

   Only a few brave voices stir. 
Tom O'Grady, a poet/wine maker from the Old Dominion, writes sonnets about the Great Grape and had a minor hit a few years back with "Sitting Under a Picture of Robert E. Lee in a Small Bar Somewhere in the South of Virginia." 
But such enthusiasms are rare. 

   None of this is meant to discount the value of the cautionary tale, which is well represented in this anthology. 
In fact, parents might have their adolescents read the book to get an idea of the variety of experiences drinking provides. 
There are potent tales to be told, of poor creatures who awoke, post-binge, in a strange hedgerow, only to exclaim, "Hallo! 
What's this? 
A knife wound?" 
Or about the sop who peered up from a drunk-tank bunk to find a cellmate swinging from a pantleg noose. 

   Yet, as "Inspired by Drink" also reminds us, alcohol warmed Christ's belly, lightens the mourner's burden, and has sponsored countless hours of fellowship during the grim history of our fractious species. 
Those who busy themselves turning wine back into water go too far. 
There's a middle ground. 
Or as Pascal said: "No Wine, no wisdom/Too much wine -- the same." 

   ---
   Mr. Shiflett takes an occasional nip in Vienna, Va. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
