ID: 196	RANK: 53	SCORE: 10.533277
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861204-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
A Journalist and a Gentleman
---
By Edmund Fuller</HL>
<DD> 12/04/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "He was one of those newspaper editors who rise up now and again from journalism's trough of mortal error and become the personification of certain values deemed important in the community." 
The tribute is paid to Virginius Dabney, former editor of the Richmond Times-Dispatch, by a much younger fellow Virginian, Tom Wolfe, in the introduction to "Virginius Dabney's Virginia: Writings About the Old Dominion" (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, 217 pages, illustrated, $24.95), with photographs by John Theilgard. 

   The compliment is doubly interesting because Tom Wolfe, born in Richmond, was one of the best known early practitioners of the so-called "new journalism," a high-rolling, lively, often reckless style of reporting. 
Mr. Dabney worked in a tradition generally more responsible if sometimes more sedate. 
Differing from that higher standard in another direction, there always has been and still is a breed of cheap-jack journalists, scandalmongers and sensation brewers whose disregard for truth is worse than the stylistic overkill sometimes found among the new journalists. 

   Virginius Dabney, now 85, adds a prefatory note about the inception of this selection from his books and newspaper writing. 
Occasionally he inserts a few lines of comment at the head of a chapter. 
What he has written about his native state in all 20 of these pieces, "has always been done con amore. 
Even when I have been most critical of the old commonwealth, I have tried to leaven the disparagement with at least a modicum of compensatory praise . . . there have been tendencies and actions that strained the bonds of my affection. 
But there was never a time when I wanted to leave Virginia permanently for any other place on earth." 
That is why, as a young journalist in 1926, he was not seduced when a fellow newspaper writer, upon hearing that Mr. Dabney had made the pages of The American Mercury, exclaimed, "You certainly don't have to stay in Richmond." 

   The selections range from two essays that appeared in The American Mercury in the mid '20s, through work he produced during his decades of association with the Times-Dispatch, to excerpts from "The Last Review, Richmond, 1932," an account of the last great gathering of Confederate veterans, published in 1984 by Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. 

   These incisive essays include history, biography, personal memories and reflections. 
Their range lifts the collection above the immediate subject of the Old Dominion to perspectives on America, past and present, that make it a book of national interest. 

   "The Decline of Virginia" reveals a surprising, puzzling emigration -- a brain drain, it might be called today -- from the state during more than a decade before the Civil War. 
Its consequence was the ascendancy of Charleston, S.C., over Richmond in Southern influence. 

   Mr. Dabney documents this and speculates, "If the Old Dominion had not sustained so tragic a loss of prestige, its more conservative viewpoint might conceivably have prevailed. 
Peace rather than war might have been the final arbitrament, as intersectional tensions grew ever more ominous, and the sixties neared." 

   Several chapters touch on America's colonial history. 
"Jack Jouett's Ride," on the night of June 3-4, 1781, was a hazardous 40-mile dash across rough terrain from Cuckoo Tavern, in Louisa County, to Monticello. 
Jouett's achievement enabled Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, Richard Henry Lee, and other members of Virginia's General Assembly to escape capture in an unexpected British raid. 
Mr. Dabney argues convincingly that it eclipses the feat of Paul Revere, observing that Jouett was not lucky enough to have a Longfellow to commemorate him. 
From Homer's time, it has paid doers of valorous deeds to be known to poets. 

   "The Jefferson Scandals" demolishes the allegation that the master of Monticello had a slave mistress and slave children. 
Psychobiographers and other fiction writers have given so much ill-grounded currency to that claim in recent years as to lend it much unmerited popular credence. 

   "Life at the Early University" (of Virginia), in its account of student disorders, including the murder of a faculty member, makes student turmoil of the 1960s seem almost mild. 

   Mr. Dabney's memoir of his own boyhood, "Charlottesville in the 1910s," is a treasury of recollections. 
"Edgar Allan Poe in Richmond" surveys the poet's tragic life. 
"A Prophet of the New South" is about Ellen Glasgow, who was born into Richmond's genteel circles but later horrified them with her realistic fiction. 
Miss Glasgow died in 1945. 
This essay, based on a 1929 interview, makes one wish we could hear her thoughts on a greatly different South in 1986. 

   These essays show Mr. Dabney at his diverse best. 
As Tom Wolfe says: "At the beginning of his newspaper career he was assailed as a liberal or worse. 
Toward the end he was assailed as a conservative or worse. 
In fact, he was the enlightened Virginia Gentleman of the finest vintage from start to finish." 

   Both Mr. Dabney and Mr. Wolfe pay tribute to another modern Richmond editor and writer, the late Douglas Southall Freeman. 
Scribners has just released a paperback edition of Mr. Freeman's three-volume, "Lee's Lieutenants: A Study in Command," a pillar of Civil War history. 
Each volume is $16.95, but the three together run to a massive 2,545 pages, with maps and illustrations, making it a bargain. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
