ID: 123	RANK: 1	SCORE: 15.634205
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880308-0144 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: The Chimes at Kendall: Paul Matisse's Subway </HL>
<AUTHOR> David Stipp </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Cambridge, Mass.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   For months beneath the streets of this college town, artist Paul Matisse and his audience have been communing about music, joy and mechanical engineering. 

   It began in October after he installed 16 massive chimes in Cambridge's recently renovated Kendall Square subway station. 
The piece, called "Pythagoras," was broken the day after its unveiling, and despite repairs and redesignings, it has been broken repeatedly since then. 
It isn't vandalism. 
Mr. Matisse just hadn't taken into account the urgency of the yearning to make euphony behind all those tired, poker faces on the subway. 

   Working on commission from the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority and the Cambridge Arts Council, Mr. Matisse specifically designed the piece so strap-hangers could make it ring. 
And ring it does, when you pull on one of two handles, which are really aluminum arms projecting from the walls of the inbound and outbound platforms and linked via overhead rods and levers to the chimes, which hang out of reach between the tracks. 
The chimes themselves are aluminum cylinders, four inches in diameter and as much as almost nine feet long. 
When rung, they make soul-satisfying tintinnabulations, like big gongs in a cave. 

   The handles are the weak links in this troglodyte's delight. 
Gently rocking them swings the hammers, which sway back and forth like the tongues of bells to strike the chimes. 
The handles look strong, but some commuters get carried away and throw themselves onto them like Rocky training for his last-chance match. 
The resulting breakdowns at first chagrined Mr. Matisse, who is the grandson of the painter Henri Matisse and the stepson of artist Marcel Duchamp. 
This Mr. Matisse got his training at Harvard in design, he has dabbled in physics, engineering and architecture, and he takes pride in getting the details right. 
His specialty is precisely machined mobiles -- things of steel wheels and interlockings sweet enough to charm the socks off a mechanical engineer. 

   When he heard his chimes had broken, Mr. Matisse headed for the station to set things right. 
Arriving from his home, which once was and still looks like a big, white Baptist church in Groton, Mass., about an hour's drive away, the 55-year-old artist witnessed a subway rider "really putting his back into it and just working away with tremendous force" on the remaining unbroken handle. 
"There are people," he reflects like a traveler just back from a strange land, "who live in that world in which action is put over all the other stuff." 

   Mr. Matisse's dialogue with his audience began when he posted gently admonishing, apologetic notes next to the disabled handles. 
A typical one said: "This time it was an epoxied joint that gave in to someone's enthusiasm . . . 
Thanks for waiting." 

   The Kendall Square station is the stop for Massachusetts Institute of Technology and it is two stops from Harvard, which partly explains why many passers-by reacted to the notes like professors grading a pet student's paper. 
Instead of defacing Mr. Matisse's 8 1/2-by-11 sheets, they penned criticisms, praise, advice and all manner of marginalia on them. 

   As the chimes' ups and downs continued, Mr. Matisse's notes became a kind of spontaneous art forum. 
It continues, for though "Pythagoras" is working again, he still posts messages about progress on two other musical contraptions he is making for the station. 
He has collected an impressive sheaf of the annotated notes next to the personal computer he used to design the chimes' acoustics, which are based on the same blend of mathematics and music that fascinated Pythagoras, the ancient Greek inventor of a musical scale and the geometry theorem that bears his name. 

   The "Pythagoras" graffiti tell, sometimes eloquently, of an outburst of delight and surprise in a place of monotonous routine. 
"Heaven couldn't have better bells than this," wrote one passing critic. 
"Thanks for making me forget the horrors of this day," inscribed a harried soul. 
Another enchanted commuter confessed that he "felt like the Hunchback of Notre Dame" when ringing the chimes. 

   Many comments sound like excerpts from a standing ovation for an opera performed at the Tower of Babel. 
"Wunderbar," roared one passerby with his pen. 
"Magnifico," shouted another. 
At least one excited scribbling seems to be in Sanskrit. 

   A few of these underground music critics strive toward poetry, with such lyrical reactions as, "a tender use of metal" or the chimes "transform a subway pit to a subterranean cathedral." 

   The majority, however, seem to have come right out of the heart of MIT, whose plain buildings are identified by numbers rather than names. 
Mr. Matisse's technical difficulties have fired the imaginations of the scientists and engineers passing through the station. 
"A viscous clutch might do the job," wrote one laconic observer. 
Another sketched a picture of a proposed solution, in which opposing pistons absorb excessive forces. 
One MIT insider offered the services of the school's mechanical engineers, who "would love to take this on as a project." 
The most succinct suggestion came from a self-described physicist, who simply jotted down an equation for the desired motion of the hammers. 

   Small debates soon broke out among the technical kibitzers. 
"The problem is with the length of the hammers; the rhythm needed to ring the long and short {ones} does not correspond," wrote one of them. 
But "that's what creates interesting rhythmic variations," countered a second. 
Try to "hit the natural frequency," advised a third. 

   When one petulant perfectionist advised Mr. Matisse to take an introductory MIT class in mechanical design "coz it's obvious you don't know the first thing about it," someone else scribbled underneath, "Paul, Pay No Mind!! 
This guy is an ass." 

   Perhaps the ultimate testament to the chimes' success as mass-transit art are the comments from those who don't seem to be part of the academic crowd. 
"Groovy tunes, dude," inscribed one reviewer; "Like, dude, way kickin'," wrote another. 
In large, eloquent block letters, one of Mr. Matisse's favorite appreciators opined: "Radical move, dude." 

   Comments Mr. Matisse, "I'm very pleased that my work seems to be universally affecting. 
It isn't art in the usual sense. 
Art in the usual sense is a mystery at the moment. 
I love the immediately evident, rather than the more abstract, abstruse focusings." 

   For their part, the Kendall band, as Mr. Matisse calls those who ring his chimes, continue to dream up responses to his work that are more gratifying to him than normal art criticism. 
Recently, he experienced a kind of epiphany when finishing up some work in the station a little after 5 a.m. (Mr. 
Matisse can work on his subway art pieces only in the early morning, when the trains aren't running.) 

   As he recalls it: "On the other side of the tracks, there were two ladies, who I think were coming home from all-night cleaning jobs. 
They sat down, and one of them looked over at me and gestured for me to play the chimes. 
They just wanted to hear them. 
So I played." 

   ---
   Mr. Stipp is a reporter in the Journal's Boston bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
