ID: 123	RANK: 10	SCORE: 7.755195
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871006-0127 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Quips and Quintessences
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 10/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   In all the current excitement about education that has made best sellers out of E.D. Hirsch Jr.'s "Cultural Literacy" and Allan Bloom's "The Closing of the American Mind," there is one central issue. 
It is the failure of the schools to lure students into the slipstream of intellectual history. 
Mr. Hirsch wants to correct this on the cheap, by teaching a short list of terms that will allow his acolytes to pass themselves off as intellectuals. 
Mr. Bloom has a higher aim, a return to high educational standards through hard mental work. 

   In their separate ways, both of these authors have been making a hero of the intellectual. 
Mr. Hirsch's list is a kind of magic elixir, a Superman suit that will transform Video Dolt into Highbrow. 
Mr. Bloom's high-toned attack on mush-brained curricula is also a campaign for what might be called higher education, whose goal must be the routine production of highbrows, people who speak Mr. Bloom's language. 

   Both Mr. Hirsch and Mr. Bloom should consider recommending a new book that exemplifies the virtues they have been acclaiming -- and goes beyond them. 
W.V. Quine's "Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary" (Harvard, 249 pages, $20) can be said, in a way, to follow the Hirsch method. 
It defines various concepts and lists them in alphabetical order, commencing, indeed, with "alphabet" and ending with "zero." 
These may sound too elementary for the Hirschite intent on expanding his vocabulary to include nominally intellectual shibboleths of use in the tohubohu of cocktail parties. 
But Mr. Quine, Edgar Pierce Professor of Philosophy Emeritus at Harvard and arguably the leading philosophical mind in the world, has much to teach most people about alphabets and the meaning of zero. 
Mr. Bloom might find him too analytical, not interested enough in the history of philosophy as Mr. Bloom teaches it. 
But I think he would concede that Mr. Quine is an intellectual -- high, wide and handsome -- opening his mind to the rest of us here in a way that exemplifies the best of what a first-rate mind can do when aiming to explain himself to nonspecialists in mostly nontechnical language. 

   Mr. Quine, who has in his time changed the face of symbolic logic and ordinary language philosophy, here turns his mind to standard philosophical subjects such as free will, to topics in number theory and to matters of language. 
He has spent a lifetime making things clear, and the 85 mini-essays collected here are models of clarity in the discussion of difficult ideas. 
Some of the entries, especially those built on mathematical set theory, will make most people slow down and think hard, but even these sections are entertaining. 

   That is, perhaps, faint praise, too faint for the constant stream of wit and word play that Mr. Quine throws off as naturally as he breathes. 
Mr. Quine is a very funny man. 
He doesn't do it to please you and me so much as to please himself. 
He is someone who can see the humorous side to Fermat's Last Theorem without distorting its complexity. 
"Let me begin," he begins, "in the words of W.S. Gilbert, with a lot of news about the square on the hypotenuse." 
There follows an account of the "notorious" equation left behind unproved at his death by the French mathematician Pierre de Fermat (1601-65). 
The theorem purports to expand Pythagoras's formula for the square on the hypotenuse to cover all higher powers. 
After running us through the history of this famous conundrum, Mr. Quine adds a clever restatement of the idea put in terms of sorting objects into colored bins. 

   Every phrase in this book is a condensation of ideas usually stated at greater length, but Mr. Quine has the gift of turning the complex into the conversational without sanding off the edges. 
Often he sounds like the world's most intelligent stand-up comic. 
Here he is edging into a discussion of necessity: "'Must,' we are told, implies 'is.' 
Whatever is necessarily the case is the case. 
Yet I say 'He must be halfway home' precisely to allow for my missing my guess and his not being halfway home. 
Otherwise I would say 'He's halfway home' flat out. 
Clearly something must give, and what must give is 'must.' 
The word may express necessity half the time, but half the time it connotes precisely the lack of necessity, or the lack anyway of certainty. 'Must' is a law unto itself, if 'law' is the word I want." 

   Mr. Quine's gift for fresh restatement crops up everywhere. 
On free will, he states neatly: "One is free, in the ordinary sense of the term, when one does as one likes or sees fit; and this is not altered by the fact, if fact it be, that what one likes or sees fit has had its causes . . . freedom to choose to do otherwise than one likes or sees fit would be a sordid boon." 

   It is impossible in this space to exhibit the full Quinian magic, the magnificent command of reasoning, pace, rhetoric and humor -- how in two pages he considers the traditional arguments justifying altruism as self-interest, finds them wanting, but does not see this as a threat to morality: "I say that such a justification would have been unworthy anyway, smacking of the venal and the sordid. 
Let virtue be its own reward." 
He draws the line, however, at altruism aimed at the welfare of subhuman species: "The human heart is distended until it is as big as all outdoors." 

   Mr. Quine's own heart is actually a warmer and more capacious place than his life in numbers and syllogisms might make you think. 
He concludes "Altruism" with an appeal to human sympathy: ". . . there are uncharted moral wastes over which only our dim consciences, briefed by a conscientious assessment of probable consequences, are our faltering guides." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
