ID: 123	RANK: 36	SCORE: 3.481467
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880914-0098 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Renaissance Number Crunching for Profit </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joel E. Cohen </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   In the late 15th century, Venice was the commercial capital of the Western world, the center of a vast network of international trade. 
The spirit of the period was captured by the merchant Francesco di Marco Datim, who headed every page of his ledgers, "in the name of God and Profit." 

   Then, as now, business ran on numbers. 
Profits of complex partnerships had to be divided, tare and tret determined, supplies purchased and accounts kept. 
Barter and currency exchanges involved calculations considered elaborate at the time. 
Commerce depended on trained computers, which in those days were people who knew how to compute. 

   To meet the need for commercial computers, reckoning masters in many European cities founded schools for teen-age boys and wrote manuals for them. 
Unlike the Latin mathematics texts used in universities, which aimed at a small elite, the commercial arithmetic texts were written in vernacular languages for the children of merchants and civil servants. 
While university texts continued to teach arithmetic in Roman numerals, texts of commercial arithmetic taught the new and controversial Hindu-Arabic numerals, known as "mercantile figures." 

   The compactness of Hindu-Arabic numerals, which actually originated in China, and the ease of doing arithmetic with them, made them obviously superior for business. 
The ease of learning arithmetic based on the new numerals made them a threat to the universities' monopoly on computational knowledge. 

   The first known dated book of mathematics printed with movable type was a commercial arithmetic text published in Italy, where the demands for it from practical businessmen were greatest. 
It appeared in 1478 in Treviso, a center of trading and industry a day's travel north of Venice. 
Lacking both title and author's name, it is known simply as the Treviso Arithmetic. 

   The state of arithmetic in 1478 can hardly be imagined now. 
Though addition and subtraction had become fairly standardized, eight methods of multiplication and four methods of long division were practiced. 
The form of long division taught today in American elementary schools was still unborn. 
Decimal fractions, the basis of dollars and cents, lay more than a century in the future. 
Of the four standard symbols for the arithmetic operations, not one had yet been invented. 
Verbal circumlocutions were required to state problems and to describe methods of solution because algebraic symbols were still unknown in Europe. 

   "Capitalism and Arithmetic: The New Math of the 15th Century" (Open Court Press, 315 5th Street, Peru, Ill. 61354; 345 pages; $16.95), by the historian Frank J. Swetz, tells the fascinating story of the Treviso Arithmetic and its connection with every aspect of late medieval and early Renaissance life. 
A readable complete English translation of the original Treviso Arithmetic is included. 

   In Mr. Swetz's learned and engrossing commentary on the text, you can find facts that will impress your boss and amaze your friends, such as the mathematical origins of the words "counter" (as in "over-the-counter"), "bank," "bankruptcy" and "digits." 
You also will learn how the percent symbol came about, and how it was first determined that there should be a horizontal line between a subtraction problem and its answer. 
There is even an old method of multiplying many-digit numbers that is clearly superior to the one now taught in schools. 

   The rich historical details support a compelling account of how mercantile capitalism in the Venetian republic of the early Renaissance crucially influenced the evolution of mathematics and how mathematics helped the rise of capitalism. 

   The demands of business brought European mathematics out of the clouds. 
The incessant repetition of problems of similar form stimulated the advance from rhetorical algebra to symbolic algebra. 
By no accident, Venice was the first European city to endow public lectures on algebra. 
Widespread demand in the business community for the new methods of Hindu-Arabic arithmetic stimulated innovations in printing. 
Printing in turn speeded the standardization of mathematical notation. 

   Like two legs of a runner, mathematics and mercantilism each propelled the other, whereas separately they only had hopped. 

   The Treviso Arithmetic of 1478 finds its counterpart today in the how-to-compute books of every popular bookstore. 
International ventures, intricate collaborations, manufacturing, banking, transportation, accounting and risk management required then and require now unprecedented calculations. 
The computational ease and power that Hindu-Arabic numerals offered half a millennium ago are paralleled today by the software that drives electronic computers. 
Some of that software automates mathematics developed specifically for business -- linear programming, for example -- but most draws on a deep reservoir of unexpectedly useful mathematics accumulated since 1478. 

   ---
   Mr. Cohen is professor of populations at Rockefeller University in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
