ID: 123	RANK: 45	SCORE: 3.221688
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870922-0115 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Princeton's Wise Men
---
By Raymond Sokolov</HL>
<DD> 09/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   In 1931, foes of "Jewish physics" in Germany published an anti-relativistic tract called "100 Authors Against Einstein." 
The book was intellectually laughable but the rising tide of Nazism it helped to swell was not. 
Like many other German Jews alert to their growing danger at home, Albert Einstein emigrated to America, landing, relatively speaking, on his feet, as one of the first four faculty members at a remarkable new academic center. 
Kurt Godel, the second smartest man in the world, was also there from the start. 
And before long this paradise of the mind would welcome John von Neumann, father of the modern computer, perhaps the most cerebrally dazzling and influential thinker of the century. 

   In "Who Got Einstein's Office? 
Eccentricity and Genius at the Institute for Advanced Study" (Addison-Wesley, 316 pages, $17.95), Ed Regis tells the story of Princeton's illustrious enclave, from those early days of glamour and achievement to the problematic present. 

   It all started because Louis Bamberger and his sister Caroline Bamberger Fuld sold their New Jersey department store to Macy's for $25 million in 1929 six weeks before the Crash. 
Among the philanthropies they planned was a New Jersey medical school that would favor Jewish applicants. 
Pursuing this aim, they consulted Abraham Flexner, an academic muckraker and visionary, who transmuted the populist medical school into an elitist avatar of the Platonic Academy. 
Here the greatest minds on the planet would come to think. 

   They also did manage to affect the outside world, as an emblem of disinterested intellection and through practical achievement. 
Von Neumann even did physical experiments on the premises, despite strong objections from many quarters in the institute, perfecting computer architecture and writing some of the first computer software, directly in treacherous machine language. 
The machine worked right away and its shakedown test was the largest computation ever done until that time, over a billion arithmetic and logical operations to predict whether the untested hydrogen bomb would explode. 

   As von Neumann's collaborator Julian Bigelow recalled it for Mr. Regis: "It was computed in the summer of 1950 by Marshall Rosenbluth, while the machine had clip leads on it. 
We had engineers there to keep it running and it ran for 60 days, day and night, with very few errors. 
It did a nice job. 
And it was a very historic computation." 

   The research was atypical for the institute (the computer lab was dismantled after von Neumann's death), but Mr. Regis's treatment of the episode is typical of his method. 
He is a science journalist (for OMNI) and a philosopher on the faculty at Howard University in Washington. 
So he characteristically makes his way through his often technical story with plenty of anecdotes in hand. 
But he does not skirt the hard parts of his material, explaining them as clearly as he can to a nonmathematical audience and always worrying at their moral or philosophical significance. 

   If you want to get an idea of the birth of the computer or a glimpse of one of its flashier mathematical applications (those self-proliferating graphic patterns produced by institute alumnus Benoit Mandelstam's fractal algorithms), Mr. Regis is as good a teacher as you will find. 
He even includes some simple fractal programs you can try out on your Mac and watch them change and grow. 
Mr. Regis also can make the most austere institute scholars come through as more than just brains. 
He gives you Einstein pathetically following a blind alley for his whole career in Princeton; Godel starving himself to death in guilty fear that his famous theorem, which radically altered mathematics, was mistaken and that he had not achieved enough. 

   In the most entertaining way, Mr. Regis gives you a taste of the hardest science there is, but he is not just using the institute as a convenient armature for organizing an overview of recent physics and math. 
He really has written a serious institutional history in which the politics, external and internal, of J. Robert Oppenheimer's tenure as institute director and the overarching issue of the institute's purpose and place in the world are gracefully, fairly considered. 

   The Oppenheimer case has been much discussed -- his charisma as director of the Los Alamos project, his subsequent public disgrace as a security risk. 
Mr. Regis says simply: "It was Oppenheimer's mental quickness, combined with a selective liberty with truth, that led to his well-publicized downfall." 
But he also shows how Oppenheimer's grandstanding arrogance at a congressional hearing in 1949 humiliated Lewis Strauss, who as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission arranged to have Oppenheimer's office at the institute wiretapped and later had the man's head. 
Mr. Regis summarizes the Oppenheimer literature in a page or two, ending with the letter supporting Oppenheimer's continuing tenure as institute director, signed by some of the institute's faculty: Einstein, Godel, von Neumann. 

   Clearly, Mr. Regis thinks the institute's greatest days are over, that its lingering emphasis on theory is a limitation and that it now does a better job as a temporary haven for postdoctoral fellows than it does as a lifelong hidey-hole for world-class sages. 
But Mr. Regis still feels the tug of the place and the thrill of its brilliant denizens, who must have sensed his own intelligence and sympathy for them. 
They talked to him freely, and he has let the rest of us eavesdrop at a polite distance. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
