ID: 123	RANK: 63	SCORE: 2.889459
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880608-0032 </DOCNO>
<HL> When It Comes to Math, U.S. Students Find That the Numbers Don't Add Up </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> GOVMT </CO>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON (AP)  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A government-sponsored study concluded that American students are doing miserably in math, and experts laid some of the blame on the redundant, slow-paced way math is taught in most schools. 

   The National Assessment of Educational Progress reported that almost half the 17-year-old students tested in 1985-86 proved incapable of handling math commonly taught in junior high, and nearly 27% of 13-year-olds were stumped by basic computations. 

   "Our ninth graders are taking what other people's seventh graders are taking," Chester Finn Jr., the assistant U.S. secretary of education for research and improvement, told a news conference. 
"We've got to get it going faster, repeated less and make sure that it's learned more." 

   The study was based on exams given to nearly 15,000 students ages 9, 13 and 17 in 1985-86, and to a total of nearly 35,000 students in grades 3, 7 and 11. 
It was the fourth national assessment in math since 1972-73. 

   The study, "The Mathematics Report Card: Are We Measuring Up," said all three age groups made modest improvements in recent years, but mostly on low-order skills. 
Fewer were capable of advanced work in 1986 than in 1978. 

   "Despite signs of their progress across time, the 1986 performance of 17-year-old students was dismal," the report said. 
"Only half the high school students demonstrated an understanding of even moderately complex mathematical procedures" usually introduced in junior high. 

   The report said math classes are "dominated by paper-and-pencil drills on basic computation. 
Little evidence appears of any widespread use of calculators, computers or mathematics projects." 

   More than a quarter of the 17-year-olds reported they usually do not understand what is talked about in mathematics class. 

   Math instruction is "dominated by teacher explanations, chalkboard presentations, and reliance on textbooks and workshops. 
More innovative forms of instruction, such as . . . . 
small group activities, laboratory work and special projects, remain disappointingly rare." 

   "The early emphasis on practicing computations may serve to divorce mathematics from real-world observations," the report said. 
"Once students learn to rely on procedures, they tend to give up on common sense . . . 
This can lead to preposterous answers." 

   "We're seeing a lot of drill and practice on obsolete skills," said John A. Dossey, an Illinois State University math professor. 

   But the students tested in 1986 also reported getting more homework and tests in math, and more were enrolled in advanced courses. 

   The report said 98% of the 9-year-olds and 100% of the older students knew simple arithmetic facts, but virtually none of the younger students and only 6.4% of the oldest could solve multistep problems and algebra questions. 

   Black and Hispanic students, as well as those living in the Southeast, gained ground, but remain far behind the white majority. 

   Sen. Lawton Chiles (D., Fla.) called it "tragic" and said, "To the question, 'Mathematics: are we measuring up?' the answer is, simply, no." 

   Rep. Augustus F. Hawkins (D., Calif.), chairman of the House Education and Labor Committee, called it "quite sobering" and said it was "shameful that Japanese companies seeking to open plants here must use graduate students to do calculations done by high schoolers in Japan." 

   The tests indicated girls and boys "had identical average mathematics proficiency" at age 9, but boys outscored girls at 13 and 17. 

   "Females tend to outperform males on tasks where there is an obvious procedural rule to follow, while the reverse seems to be true when the strategy for solving the problem is less apparent," the study said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
