ID: 248	RANK: 29	SCORE: 12.044983
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870728-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> On Film: Two for the Money, One for the Show
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 07/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> You probably will see worse movies than "Jaws  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    the
Revenge" this year. It's still July; the summer load hasn't
been completely dumped.
   This latest "Jaws," the fourth in the series, is doing good business, though the audience I saw it with didn't seem very scared, or very involved in any way at all. 
No one gasped when the shark (was it always so obviously fake?) chomped human snacks, nor did anyone boo or hiss at the silly lines and generally awful performances. 
No one did much of anything, not even squirm to indicate boredom. 

   The lumpish passivity around me would have been frightening had I not been an experienced television watcher. 
I, too, have from time to time settled into a kind of half-slumber in front of the tube, dumbly watching whatever flashed in front of me, comforted because I didn't have to worry about what would happen next since I could play out most of the stories with the dial turned off. 

   Perhaps foolishly, I look to the movies for more, but not now, not in the summer. 
Predictability lands as predictably as dog-day heat and high humidity. 
"Superman," "Revenge of the Nerds," "Beverly Hills Cop," and, of course, "Jaws" have all spawned box-office successes. 

   So the big question surrounding the latest James Bond picture was: Will the new James Bond satisfy the requirements of predictability? 
Would he be elegantly virile enough, would he pun satisfactorily, would he approach his cloak-and-daggering with the correct mix of irony and earnestness? 

   Eventually, Timothy Dalton will match his predecessors as 007, but he isn't ready yet to fill the gadget-armed shoes of Sean Connery and Roger Moore. 
He does look the part, however, in the latest Bond adventure, "The Living Daylights." 
Tall, skinny and handsomely cleft in cheek and chin, Mr. Dalton has a dark charm closer to Mr. Connery's than to Mr. Moore's. 
He seems a little stiff at times, but that might be, as a friend suggests, the thing he can't yet possess: the knowledge that he is a star. 

   The film makers have surrounded him with the usual Bond trappings but not with the usual bevy of beautiful babes. 
This Bond is a man of the '80s, a practitioner of safer sex. 

   As has become usual, the villains are no longer the Soviets, but a non-major power. 
For the 13th time Desmond Llewellyn is Q, the British secret service's gadget-meister, and, for the third time, Robert Brown is top spy M. 
The plot careens all over the place, as though the Bond manufacturers don't want us to pay too much attention to their new man. 

   They needn't worry. 
This Bond does fine in the one ongoing series that seems less objectionable than the rest. 
He will do even better in the next one, but for now it also helps that the producers have sent him to, among other great locations, Bratislava. 

   ---
   Actually, one interesting question did emerge from "Jaws -- the Revenge": Why would a marvelous actor like Michael Caine bother with it, even for money? 
In fact, he treated his secondary role respectfully, which only emphasized the amateurishness around him. 

   However, after seeing "The Whistle Blower," I figure Mr. Caine must arrange his performing schedule like this: one for the money, one for the show. 
"The Whistle Blower," a British spy film, is everything "Jaws" is not: taut, suspenseful, emotional, intelligent. 

   Julian Bond's terrific screenplay, adapted from John Hale's novel, uses wonderful language to delve into the relationships between fathers and sons, the British old-boy system, contemporary espionage. 
For example, when John Gielgud, as a traitorous aristocrat and elder statesman, explains why he did what he did, he says, sniffing: "It wasn't a moral decision, it was an aesthetic one." 

   Mr. Caine is one of those rare top-drawer actors who, with the slightest shifting of expression, can make you think you know what he's thinking or feeling. 
He plays Frank Jones, a middle-aged man who long ago quit rebelling and has since been trudging along. 
He's only slightly paunchy but seems heavy, resigned to the limits of life's promise. 

   But when his son, who works as a linguist for British intelligence, dies suddenly, after confiding his suspicions about the spy system to his daughter, something happens to Frank. 
You can almost feel the heat rising off Mr. Caine's cool surface as he transforms Frank from a go-along fellow into a dangerous man, a man who has nothing to live for but revenge. 

   Not "Jaws"-style revenge, of course. 
"The Whistle Blower" is that rare summer happening, a real movie. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
