ID: 248	RANK: 90	SCORE: 8.637236
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870806-0106 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Film: Texas Charmers, Teen Vampires
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 08/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   There's more foam than beer in Robert Benton's "Nadine," by which I mean it looks pretty but leaves you feeling as though you'd swallowed too much air. 
One burp and the whole thing will be forgotten. 

   I don't mean to imply that "Nadine" is a bad movie. 
It is, in fact, pleasant fluff, an altogether easy sit-through, especially considering the unpleasantness of much of the current competition. 

   Mr. Benton, who wrote and directed the movie, has said he only had a couple of characters in mind when he started writing the script. 
He didn't get much beyond that -- the story is a rickety adventure -- but the characters he came up with are swell, a couple of low-rent Texas charmers called Nadine and Vernon. 
Kim Basinger and Jeff Bridges play these folksy schemers with an edgy mix of twang and sizzle that gives this sweet little picture some tension (otherwise it might just float off the screen). 

   The point of the picture is for Nadine and Vernon, who are on the verge of divorce, to reunite. 
Mr. Benton has them accomplish this by means of high jinks that require the estranged couple to band together to try to out-connive a locally powerful crook. 

   It's all meant to be wacky stuff -- car chases, tightrope-walking stunts between buildings, the new girlfriend almost finding the wife in the bedroom. 

   Yet the picture seems a little weightless, maybe because Mr. Benton has done his best work on movies with strong stories and more or less conventional structure. 
"Wacky" and "lighthearted" aren't terms that come to mind when one thinks of "Bonnie and Clyde," which he co-authored, or "Kramer vs. 
Kramer" and "Places in the Heart," which he directed. ("Powerful" and "evocative," however, do.) 

   It isn't that he skimped on "Nadine." 
He hired the right people to create a certain mood -- the talented production designer Paul Sylbert and cinematographer Nestor Almendros. 
The details of the small-town '50s atmosphere are precise. 
The comedy just isn't sprightly enough to compensate for the story's flimsiness. 

   Still, Mr. Benton knows how to draw appealing characters and how to cast them. 
With her pouty lips and narrow eyes, Ms. Basinger seems like just another sultry blond sulk until she opens her mouth. 
Her voice is countrified and direct, and her delivery is great. 
As she's already shown in "The Man Who Loved Women" and "Blind Date," she's capable of drawing laughs as well as ogles. 

   Here she makes do with what Mr. Benton has given Nadine: a tatty kind of period elegance she's picked up from magazines like "Modern Screen." 
She looks terrific in her wide-shouldered suits cinched at the waist, or flouncing around in a polka-dot something or other, always changing her hair to match her outfit. (She's a hairdresser.) 

   Vernon owns a down-in-the-mouth bar that he's always dreaming of fixing up. 
Mr. Bridges, thinner and less seedy looking than usual, plays Vernon just right, a little distracted because he's the kind of man who's always plotting his next move. 
When he finally focuses on Nadine he notices he loves her, but usually he isn't paying attention to anything but the ways she can drive him crazy. 

   Nadine is equally distracted. 
When she decides to seduce Vernon after they've been separated, she first has to change into something black and lacy and rub toothpaste onto her teeth with her finger. 
By the time she's ready, he's gone. 

   Mr. Benton nicely captures the way husbands and wives, like many lovers, can be nattering one moment, nuzzling the next, without much evident reason for the shift. 
And after being barraged by Yuppies onscreen, it's kind of nice to see a working-class couple -- even if they do gleam a bit too Hollywood-bright. 

   Unfortunately, Mr. Benton lays out the pattern right at the beginning and Nadine and Vernon play out their predestined parts ably and unsurprisingly. 
They bicker, then reconcile; bicker, then reconcile. 
The only character who glimmers with the promise of unpredictability is Rip Torn's cagey Buford Pope, the kind of villain who always tips his hat to a lady, even when he's about to murder her. 

   ---
   "The Lost Boys" apparently has all the ingredients for a summer hit: teen vampires, a hot soundtrack, snub-nosed adolescents who are heroes, adults who are villains and lots of preposterous clothing. 
On its first weekend out, the picture took in $5.2 million, second only to the new James Bond movie. 

   This is disturbing because it means that director Joel Schumacher will now be encouraged to make still another movie. 
Mr. Schumacher, who started his movie career as a costume designer, directed the forgettable "D.C. 
Cab," then went on to his big success: "St. 
Elmo's Fire," a "Big Chill" knockoff memorable mostly for the remarkably swank lofts he used as backdrops for his young, whiny, careerist characters. 
The movie made money, and led to "The Lost Boys." 

   The worst part about this picture for post-adolescents may be watching Dianne Wiest slog through the thankless role of the dim mom. 
Or maybe the worst part (there's so much to choose from) is the sight of a good actor like Edward Herrmann parading around looking like a demented quarterback, the shoulders of his suit jacket grotesquely padded. 
Mr. Schumacher has dressed the adorable Corey Haim (of "Lucas") in even weirder getups, jackets with pastel stripes and little outfits that resemble dresses. 
The vampires aren't nearly as creepy as those clothes. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
