ID: 248	RANK: 97	SCORE: 8.574343
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870119-0159 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Pulp and Politics: Contra Caper in Louisiana
---
By David Asman</HL>
<DD> 01/19/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   At a cocktail party thrown in honor of Elmore Leonard's new book, "Bandits" (Arbor House, 345 pages, $17.95), an admirer called attention to Mr. Leonard's good luck in coming out with a book on U.S.-contra intrigue in the midst of the Iran-contra funding imbroglio. 
Mr. Leonard observed that his timing would have been even better had the book come out right before Congress last voted on aid to the Nicaraguan rebels. 
Apparently, Mr. Leonard regards "Bandits" as a legitimate reference source for the conflict in Nicaragua. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. 

   "Bandits" presents the reader with two-dimensional characters running through a good-guy/bad-guy world that has little in common with the complex situations and full-bodied characters one finds in Central America. 
Not that the book is so bad; Mr. Leonard has constructed a fast-paced adventure story (about a five-hour read for an average reader) with amusing, if implausible characters that serve a single-line plot very well. 

   Too bad Mr. Leonard was not content to write an adventure tale. 
He presents "Bandits" as a moral and political statement based on reality, and as a result, one expects characters of some complexity. 
Mr. Leonard has not hesitated to make his thriller a parable of contemporary Central American politics. 
But "Bandits" is still a thriller, with the usual limitations of the form made embarrassingly graphic because of Mr. Leonard's inappropriate and unearned ambition to be taken seriously as the author of a political novel. 
He never went to Nicaragua, and his research was limited to a file of clippings. 

   "Bandits" brings together a politically inflamed ex-nun, an ex-con now working in a Louisiana funeral home, and a contra leader who was -- How did you guess? -- a member of Somoza's National Guard. 
Jack, the ex-con, talks and acts like a pretty average guy, which never really squares with his two previous occupations: fashion model and jewel thief. 
But that's okay, because we're more interested in the plot that unfolds around him. 

   Jack has been sent to a nearby leper hospital to remove the corpse of a Nicaraguan girl. 
Problem is, when he arrives the girl turns out to be very much alive. 
The ex-nun, who used to run a leper hospital in Nicaragua, informs Jack that a ruthless contra leader has been trying to kill the girl because he believes she gave him leprosy. 
From this meeting Jack is drawn (and draws several of his ex-con friends) into a scheme to save the girl, undermine the contras' fund-raising activities and pocket millions of contra dollars in the bargain. 

   Spurred by his attraction to and growing respect for the ex-nun Lucy, Jack turns into a committed anti-contra. 
He starts out with little knowledge of world events, but Lucy "educates" him about the realities of Central America. 
She informs Jack that all contras are made of the same stuff as the evil contra leader they are out to foil. 
And Jack is transformed from a petty-minded ex-con to a zealot devoted to Lucy's struggle against the contras. 

   Some of the other characters who join the adventure serve the book well, especially as vehicles for Mr. Leonard's witty dialogue. 
At one point Jack tells Roy, one of his ex-con buddies, "'I read in the paper that in the U.S., I think it was just this country, a woman is beaten or physically abused something like every eighteen seconds.' 

   "Roy said, 'You don't tell me.' 

   "'Somebody made a study.' 

   "Roy said, 'You wouldn't think that many women would get out of line would you?'" 

   One pivotal character is a Miskito Indian named Franklin who acts as a hit man for the contra leader. 
Franklin is a sort of Miskito version of the brutal Korean valet-assassin Odd Job who plagues James Bond in "Goldfinger." 
But this book is no giddy Ian Fleming spy farce. 
It is a serious-minded contemporary fable in which callous, dim-bulb Franklin comes to represent all Miskitos -- a gross slur. 
Toward the end of the book, Mr. Leonard suddenly endows Franklin with moral sensitivity. 
The jackal learns to weep, but we don't know why or how. 

   We also are entitled to wonder why Mr. Leonard has expended so little effort in informing himself about the realities of Central America. 
The story wouldn't have suffered from being based on an accurate view of that world. 
Mr. Leonard could have kept his scoundrels essentially as they are, but he ought to have added a few on the other side. 
That's the way the Nicaraguan situation really is, and it would have made a better, more complex novel. 

   Either Mr. Leonard should begin researching like a true political novelist (say, Mario Vargas Llosa), or he should tackle a subject better suited to the simple pleasures of pulp fiction, which he dispenses so well. 

   ---
   Mr. Asman edits the Journal's Americas column. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
