ID: 301	RANK: 48	SCORE: 10.878882
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870522-0105 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Film Producer Is Scouting Heavy Industry
---
By Roy J. Harris Jr.
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GPO BRRS CKL </IN>
<DATELINE> BEVERLY HILLS, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In two years as chief executive of a cement company, Hollywood producer Burt Sugarman has directed a baffling series of investments. 

   The cement company, Giant Group Ltd., bought control of Barris Industries Inc. -- famed for its "Gong Show" and "Dating Game" television shows -- and made overtures to take over companies with products ranging from vacuum cleaner bags to aerospace metals. 
This month, when Giant and Barris bought a stake in a company called Clark Equipment, one Barris game-show writer thought he finally had figured out the logic of at least one deal. 

   "He told us he was excited about our investment in Dick Clark's company," says a bemused Mr. Sugarman, adding that Clark Equipment Co., a South Bend, Ind.-based producer of forklift trucks, isn't related to the Clark who produces "American Bandstand." 

   Being bewildered by Mr. Sugarman's ventures is understandable. 
The 48-year-old producer was responsible for the 1986 Oscar nominee "Children of a Lesser God," along with "Extremities," "Crimes of the Heart," and other films. 
Yet he now spends most of his time building Giant into a conglomerate. 
Beyond its interest in Clark, the company's latest acquisition is a half-interest in closely held Rally's Inc., a tiny hamburger chain that Mr. Sugarman believes could one day rival McDonald's. 

   "Simple threads" run through Giant's acquisitions, the nattily dressed executive explains in his plush office across the street from the Beverly Wilshire Hotel: All the companies are low-cost producers in basic, if out-of-favor, industries that in some way rely on a mass market, he says. 
Mr. Sugarman expects sharp population growth to favor such industries in the 1990s. 

   A Beverly Hills native who started his business career selling exotic used cars when he was in his early 20s, Mr. Sugarman showed an entrepreneurial spark when he went to Italy to buy a Ghia automobile and came back with exclusive dealership rights. 
Show-business friends, many of whom he met when they bought cars from him, helped Mr. Sugarman break into television production. 
By 1972, when his "Midnight Special" television rock concerts started a popular 10-year run, he already had a number of music specials to his credit and was an active investor. 

   But why cement? 

   "Tastes change," is his cryptic explanation for paying $4 million in 1982 for the controlling interest in struggling Giant, with operations in Harleyville, S.C. 
He turned the company around, cutting its cement-making fuel costs sharply by incinerating other companies' hazardous wastes along with conventional fuels. 

   After an unsolicited offer from game-show giant Chuck Barris to sell a controlling stake in the Barris production company, Mr. Sugarman decided last year to get back into television production and make use of Barris's cash. 
Giant and Barris own Clark Equipment stakes that total 6.3% of the company's shares. 

   Mr. Sugarman's forays have brought occasional charges that he is a corporate raider. 

   "My feeling is that all he was after was . . . trying to put a company in play," says Leopold Wyler, former chairman of TRE Corp., which Mr. Sugarman tried to acquire last year. 
TRE, a maker of specialty metals for the aerospace industry, escaped a proxy contest by Giant only by selling itself to Aluminum Co. of America. 
Alcoa eventually bought Giant's 17% stake in TRE at the same price the aluminum concern paid other shareholders -- but that still resulted in a $13.3 million gain for Giant. 

   As previously reported, the Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating the roles of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Jefferies &amp; Co. in Giant's bid to win control of TRE. 
As part of the investigation, the SEC is studying whether a Giant unit and other entities with TRE holdings failed to disclose that they were acting in concert. 

   Mr. Sugarman says he believes the SEC inquiry "is going nowhere," and adds that the agency hasn't communicated with the company since it sought information and documents in December. 
Drexel "has done a terrific job for us" raising money, but wasn't involved in Giant's TRE bid, Mr. Sugarman adds. 
Adopting a combative tone, the executive says he launched a proxy fight at TRE only after the company adopted anti-takeover measures indicating "that the company had a lot to protect." 

   While Mr. Sugarman's critics say that a Hollywood producer is out of his element in heavy industry, securities analyst Craig Schwerdt of Morgan, Olmstead, Kennedy &amp; Gardner Inc., Los Angeles, says he thinks show business may be the perfect training ground for a corporate entrepreneur. 

   "You have to have a good eye as a Hollywood producer," the analyst says. 
"You're out there buying properties, and putting yourself at risk." 

   Mr. Sugarman says that Clark Equipment is currently considered an investment, although "all the alternatives are there." 
The company, which vows to fight any takeover attempt, meets Mr. Sugarman's acquisition tests. 
Mr. Schwerdt of Morgan Olmstead notes that Clark "has been getting itself lean and mean," and could be even more attractive a producer as the dollar's fall gives it an edge over foreign construction-equipment makers. 

   Despite his tentative moves into the rust bucket, Mr. Sugarman remains image-conscious, as befits his Hollywood roots. 
He is disturbed by suggestions that he is debasing himself by running Barris's low-brow game-show shop. 
As a producer often associated with quality motion pictures, he says with tongue in cheek that even Barris's silliest shows have "very good lighting, wonderful sound." 

   "Schlock? 
I don't disagree," he adds. 
But change is coming. 
Even though a new "Gong Show" is in the offing, he says, "it will look different. 
It will be a "Gong Show" of the '90s." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
