ID: 301	RANK: 53	SCORE: 10.678571
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880721-0083 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: TV: Failed Pilots, Pretty Teens, Weary Bikers </HL>
<AUTHOR> Martha Bayles </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Thursday, July 21, 8-9 p.m. EDT, on ABC: "Divided We Stand." 
Since it's turning out to be a dry, hot summer with a lot of TV writers on strike, the restless viewer might want to check out these "special programs" aired by the networks. 
If they're a half hour or an hour in length, and not a rerun, you can bet they are series pilots not picked up for the fall season. 
This drama is about a divorced couple seen through the eyes of their 11-year-old son; see if you can fathom why it was unsuccessful. 

   Friday, July 22, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on HBO (repeated on July 24, 26, 28 and 30; Aug. 4, 8 and 10): "Cinemax Sessions: Country Music -- A New Tradition." 
These music specials on Cinemax are among the better such shows on TV, although in the country field, there's always the stiff competition of PBS's "Austin City Limits." 
This session will present a quick overview of the living tradition, from 50-year bluegrass veteran Bill Monroe to the young Canadian songbird K.D. Lang. 

   Saturday, July 23, 2-4 p.m. EDT and Sunday, July 24, 3:30-6 p.m. EDT, on ABC: The U.S. Women's Open Golf Championship. 
At the Baltimore Country Club, Laura Davies will defend her title against JoAnne Carner and Japan's Ayako Okamoto. 

   Saturday, July 23, 4-6 p.m. EDT, on ABC: The U.S. Olympic Trials in track &amp; field. 
Live coverage of the final day of the trials for Seoul, from Indiana University's Track &amp; Field Stadium. 

   Saturday, July 23, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on HBO (repeated on dates to be announced): "HBO Comedy Hour Live: The Montreal International Comedy Festival Hosted by John Candy." 
OK, so you're not attracted by the catchy title. 
For a quick overview of comedy styles from around the world, watch this wrap-up of this 10-day festival, now in its sixth year. 

   Sunday, July 24, 2:30-4 p.m. EDT, on CBS: The Tour de France. 
After 21 days and 2,042 miles, those sinewy fellows crouched over their spinning wheels will pour across the finish line on the Champs Elysees. 

   Weekdays, Monday, July 25-Friday, Aug. 5; each day's segment repeated at 10 a.m., 2 p.m., 5 p.m. and 10 p.m., and 1:30 a.m. EDT; on CNN: "In Search of a Drug Free America." 
From CNN's Special Reports Unit, a two-week look at the various facets of the nation's drug problem, from supply side to demand side, with an evaluation of the various solutions proposed. 

   Monday, July 25, 9-11 p.m. EDT, on CBS: "Miss Teen USA Pageant." 
Fifty-one contestants aged 15 to 18, from every state and the District of Columbia, will assemble in San Bernardino, Calif., to compete for the tiara to be awarded by co-hosts Dick Clark and Tracy Scoggins. 
The press release promises that the show will "display the vibrancy of California's life styles as experienced by contemporary teen-agers, music and fashions of today's hip teens and the varied scenic beauty of the Golden State." 
Gag us with a spoon. 

   Tuesday, July 26, 8-9 p.m. EDT, on CBS: "Silent Whisper." 
Another would-be series pilot, this one about a San Francisco cop turned private detective who is intent upon avenging the murders of his family by a serial killer. 
The gimmick? 
He has no voice, so he won't have to speak any dumb lines. 

   Wednesday, July 27, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on PBS (PBS air dates and times vary, so check local listings): "Topaz." 
Produced by public TV station KUED in Salt Lake City, this documentary recalls life in the Utah internment camp called Topaz, where more than 8,000 Japanese-Americans from the San Francisco area spent part of World War II. 

   Saturday, July 30, 11:30 p.m.-1 a.m. EDT, on NBC: "Michael Jackson Around the World." 
He's been attracting huge audiences in Tokyo, Rome, Berlin, Paris and Munich. 
Now he's completing seven straight sold-out nights at London's Wembley Stadium. 
He's simply the most popular performer in the history of pop music. 
See if you can figure out why by watching this 90-minute collection of highlights, selected by Mr. Jackson himself. 

   Sunday, July 31, 8-10 p.m. EDT, on the Discovery Channel: "Afghanistan: The Secret War." 
Don't take Rambo's word for it -- or Gorbachev's, for that matter. 
Take an evening and consider what this film has to say about the brutality of the Soviet war effort. 

   Tuesday, Aug. 2, 8-9 p.m. EDT, on CBS: "Fort Figueroa." 
One last pilot, an ambitious attempt to embrace the social complexity of Los Angeles by focusing on a working-class neighborhood populated by immigrants from Mexico, Vietnam and Iowa. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
