ID: 205	RANK: 34	SCORE: 20.549393
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871103-0114 </DOCNO>
<HL> It Takes a Hacker
To Catch a Hacker
As Well as a Thief
---
Ian Murphy Helps Companies
Catch Computer Pirates;
But Whose Side Is He On?
---
By Dennis Kneale
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN>
<DATELINE> PHILADELPHIA  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It is almost 2 a.m., and the room is dark but for the phosphorous glow of the computer screen that illuminates the cherubic face of Capt. Zap. 
He taps the keyboard in his lap and searches for "hackers" who break into computer systems for fun or malice. 

   "We got one," Capt. Zap says. 
He starts an on-screen dialogue with the hacker and asks for phone numbers to corporate data bases that might be fun to hack into. 
The hacker advises that the best place to look tonight is the "Holiday Inn," a secret electronic bulletin board that lists such numbers. 
The captain heads thataway. 

   Capt. Zap, actually Ian A. Murphy, is well-known as one of the first convicted computer-hacker thieves. 
He has since reformed -- he swears it -- and has been resurrected as a consultant, working the other side of the bulletin boards and the right side of the law. 
His detractors doubt it. 

   Other consultants, many of them graying military veterans, try to flush out illicit hackers. 
But few boast the distinction of being a real hacker -- and one with a felony among his credentials. 
Capt. Zap is more comfortable at the screen than in a conversation. 
Asked to name his closest friend, he shakes his head and throws up his hands. 
He has none. 
"I don't like people," he says. 
"They're dreadful." 

   "He's legendary in the hacking world and has access to what's going on. 
That's a very valuable commodity to us," says Robert P. Campbell of Advanced Information Management in Woodbridge, Va., Mr. Murphy's mentor, who has hired him for consulting jobs. 

   The 30-year-old Mr. Murphy is well-connected into his nocturnal netherworld. 
Every night till 4 a.m., he walks a beat through some of the hundreds of electronic bulletin boards where hackers swap tales and techniques of computer break-ins. 
They trade passwords. 
They debate the fine points of stealing long-distance calls. 
They give tutorials: "Feds: How to Find and Eliminate Them." 

   It is very busy these nights. 
On the Stonehenge bulletin board, "The Marauder" has put up a phone number for Citibank's checking and credit-card records, advising, "Give it a call." 
On another board, Mr. Murphy finds a primer for rookie "hacklings," written by "The Knights of Shadow." 
On yet another, he sifts out network codes for the Defense Department's research agency. 

   He watches the boards for clients and warns when a system is under attack. 
For a fee of $800 a day and up, his firm, IAM/Secure Data Systems Inc., will test the security of a data base by trying to break in, investigate how the security was breached, eavesdrop on anyone you want, and do anything else that strikes his fancy as nerd vs. spy. 

   He says his clients have included Monsanto Co., United Airlines, General Foods Corp. and Peat Marwick. 
Some probably don't know he worked for them. 
His felony rap -- not to mention his caustic style -- forces him to work often under a more established consultant. 
"Ian hasn't grown up yet, but he's a technically brilliant kid," says Lindsey L. Baird, an Army veteran whose firm, Info-Systems Safeguards in Morristown, N.J., has hired Capt. Zap. 

   Mr. Murphy blames corporate "stupidity" and laziness for the hacker problem. 
He says companies aren't alarmed enough over the lapses, and he blares the blunt message on "Good Morning America," at industry seminars and in technical papers. 

   His kinds of services are much in demand these days, even if his blunt criticisms aren't. 
Computer break-ins cost companies millions of dollars each year in corporate espionage, fraud and hassle. 
The accounting firm Ernst &amp; Whinney puts computer-fraud losses at more than $3 billion a year. 

   Other experts say any figures are bogus because most thefts of data, software and such things as credit-card information aren't reported. 
Companies don't like admitting they were outfoxed by techies barely old enough to vote. 

   Lots of hackers have been busy lately. 
Agents recently busted "Shadow Hawk," 17-year-old Herbert Zinn of Chicago. 
He hacked into American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. systems and allegedly heisted software worth $1 million by "downloading" it to a home computer. 

   This summer, hackers in West Germany tapped into the U.S. space agency's European computer network, peeking at files on booster rockets and shuttle contracts. 
One of them changed a variable in a scientist's equation from pi (3.14159265) to 7, ruining two months of research. 

   Capt. Zap views this underworld from a frighteningly cluttered apartment on the city's ragged north side. 
Short and pudgy, he hovers at the screen surrounded by an electronic arsenal: closed-circuit video, printer, police radio, TV, eavesdropping gear, auto-dialer, shortwave radio, oscilloscopes and other gizmos. 

   "He's in control, it's his little world," says his wife, Carole Adrienne, who uses her psychology training to analyze the hacker mind-set. 
The place is so messy she refuses to live there. 
When they were first separated, Mr. Murphy admits he spied on her. 
"I'm an extremely jealous man," he says, "and I have the technology to stop any man." 
Says she: "You never know when the surveillance ends." 

   Mr. Murphy's electronic voyeurism started early. 
At age 14, he would sneak into the back yard to tap into the phone-switch box and listen to neighbors' calls. (He still eavesdrops now and then.) 
He quit high school at age 17. 
By 19 he was impersonating a student and sneaking into the computing center at Temple University to play computer games. 

   From there it was an easy transition to Capt. Zap's role of breaking in and peeking at academic records, credit ratings, a Pentagon list of the sites of missiles aimed at the U.S., and other verboten verbiage. 
He even left his resume inside Bell of Pennsylvania's computer, asking for a job. 

   The electronic tinkering got him into trouble in 1981. 
Federal agents swarmed around his parents' home in the wealthy suburb of Gladwyne, Pa. 
They seized a computer and left an arrest warrant. 
Capt. Zap was in a ring of eight hackers who ran up $212,000 in long-distance calls by using a "blue box" that mimics phone-company gear. 
They also ordered $200,000 in hardware by charging it to stolen credit-card numbers and using false mail drops and bogus purchase orders. 
Mr. Murphy was the leader because "I had the most contempt" for authority, he says. 

   In 1982, he pleaded guilty to receiving stolen goods and was sentenced to 1,000 hours of community service and 2 1/2 years of probation. 
"It wasn't illegal. 
It was electronically unethical," he says, unrepentant. 
"Do you know anyone who likes the phone company? 
Who would have a problem with ripping them off?" 

   Mr. Murphy, who had installed commercial air conditioning in an earlier job, was unable to find work after his arrest and conviction. 
So the hacker became a hack. 
One day in his cab he picked up a Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. manager while he was carrying a printout of hacker instructions for tapping into Dun's systems. 
Thus, he solicited his first consulting assignment: "I think you need to talk to me." 
He got the job. 

   Now Mr. Murphy treads a thin line between the hackers he reveres and the corporate clients he reviles. 
The line is so thin that critics doubt that his reformation is real. 
"Ian is a nice guy, I like him. 
I just don't trust his ethics. 
I think he's still on both sides of the law," says Carl Jackson, a security executive at Ford Motor Co. 

   Some say Mr. Murphy is more loyal to hackers than clients. 
He claims to employ the nation's top 10 hackers to break into client computers. 
This gives executives the jitters. 
Once hackers find a way in, while getting paid to do it, what is to stop them from breaking in again later on? 
Mr. Murphy won't disclose who is behind a break-in and won't help catch the culprit. 
He even advises hackers how to detect bugging by the feds. 
"I am not a bounty hunter," he says. 

   As a consultant, Mr. Murphy gets to do, legally, the shenanigans that got him into trouble in the first place. 
"When I was a kid, hacking was fun. 
Now I can make money at it and still have a lot of fun." 
He loves "tiger teaming," testing a client's security by breaking into his computer by any means necessary. 

   In tiger teaming, Mr. Murphy has even crawled through garbage bins in search of carelessly discarded passwords. (To demonstrate this on a moonlit walk at 3 o'clock one morning, he rips open a dozen trash bags outside an office building and exposes reams of papers.) 
Wearing a yellow slicker labeled "Bell of Pennsylvania," he bluffed his way into an insurance office posing as a repairman. 
Once inside, he made a beeline for the computer room. 
The inspiration for such capers? 
Old reruns of "Mission: Impossible," he says. 

   Some clients get queasy over his methods. 
Mr. Murphy had a row with Peat Marwick when one official balked at his criminal record and how he tiger-teamed the insurance office. 
Mr. Murphy says the accounting firm at first wouldn't pay him $24,000 he was owed, but it relented. 
Gary G. Goehringer, a Peat Marwick manager, confirms he hired Mr. Murphy for two jobs and stresses he was under close supervision at all times. 

   Now Ian Murphy looks to his next job. 
A Chicago company in a patent-infringement dispute suspects that a rival stole secrets by hacking into its computer system. 
Mr. Murphy may tiger-team the client's system to see whether getting in is doable. 
Better yet, he may break into the rival's computers to see whether the client's data are stored inside. 
He must check the legalities, or lack of them, for doing this. 

   Capt. Zap can barely wait. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
