ID: 128	RANK: 100	SCORE: 4.984680
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861204-0035 </DOCNO>
<HL> Bush Concedes
'Mistakes' Made
In Iranian Affair
---
Vice President Assails Shift
Of Arms Cash to Rebels,
Denies He Knew of It
---
By Jane Mayer
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/04/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> MDEST LATAM
AEROSPACE (ARO)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Vice President George Bush did what Ronald Reagan has been conspicuously unwilling to do -- acknowledge that "mistakes were made" in the Iranian arms affair. 

   In his first speech since the Iran imbroglio began, the vice president, a 1988 presidential aspirant, carefully navigated a political minefield. 
He demonstrated anew his loyalty to the president in offering the most comprehensive rationale for secretly selling arms to Iran. 
But Mr. Bush also carefully sidestepped any role that he himself might have played in the affair, and said he was totally unaware of, and opposed to, the funneling of some money raised from the sales to rebels fighting the Nicaraguan government. 

   The vice president, in a nationally televised speech, also skirted the question of whether he believed that the arms sales amounted to a swap for American hostages. 
"I can tell you the president is absolutely convinced that he did not swap arms for hostages," he said. 
(Mr. Bush dropped a phrase in his prepared text, which stated that President Reagan was convinced "in his own mind" that no such swap occurred.) 

   Many of President Reagan's advisers have urged the president to acknowledge that he made a mistake in allowing secret shipments of arms to Tehran. 
But the president has declined. 
In an interview last week, he maintained, "I do not think it (the policy) was a mistake." 

   In that interview, the president also called Lt. Col. Oliver North, the White House aide he fired for his alleged role in channeling profits from the Iranian arms sales to the anti-government Contras in Nicaragua, "a national hero." 
And he added, "My only criticism was that I was not fully informed." 

   Administration officials hope that their decisions this week to establish a commission to review the National Security Council, which apparently conducted the Iran policy, and to seek an independent counsel to look into possible criminal wrongdoing, will quell the political clamor the affair has touched off. 

   But yesterday there were few signs that the furor has abated. 
House Republican leader Robert Michel (R., Ill.), joining a chorus of calls for the president to "clean house," suggested that if he were White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan he would resign because "I would (have) felt that I let the president down." 

   Meanwhile, at a hearing of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, former National Security Adviser John Poindexter refused for the second day to discuss his role in the Iran-Contra affair. 
Mr. Poindexter's attorney, Richard Beckler, said the former official may be more willing to cooperate with the committee later. 
But he said he advised Vice Adm. Poindexter to invoke his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination because of the imminent appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the affair and because of a request from "other places." 

   Still, Sen. David Durenberger (R., Minn.), the committee chairman, said his panel can uncover most of the facts "with or without" the cooperation of Vice Adm. Poindexter and Lt. Col. North, who earlier in the week also pleaded the Fifth Amendment and declined to testify. 

   "There are a lot of witnesses," Sen. Durenberger said. 
"We can piece the story together even without them." 
After the appearance of Vice Adm. Poindexter, who resigned his White House post last week, the Senate committee interviewed a number of other witnesses believed to be professional U.S. intelligence officers. 

   Mr. Bush acknowledged in his speech, which was delivered at an American Enterprise Institute luncheon, that "there can be no denying that our credibility has been damaged by this entire episode and its aftermath." 
He called for full disclosure "even if the truth hurts." 

   The vice president gave the fullest account to date of the administration's overtures to Iran, which he said began years before the first American hostage was kidnapped in Lebanon. 
He argued that Iran is too important strategically to ignore. 

   "Still, the question remains of how the administration could violate its own policy of not selling arms to Iran," Mr. Bush continued. 
The answer, he said, was "simple human hope" that the shipments would give a "signal" to the Iranians that the U.S. was sincere and might result indirectly in the release of the hostages. 

   "Call it leadership; give 20-20 hindsight and call it a mistaken tactic; call it what you want -- it was risky, but potentially of long term value," he said. 

   Aides to Mr. Bush privately say the vice president's handling of his role in the unfolding arms scandal will be critical to his political prospects. 
"If he gets sucked in, it will be as damaging to him as anyone in the administration -- probably more so," said one adviser, who asked not to be named. 
"And even if he knew nothing, there's still a problem of guilt by association." 

   Mr. Bush's role in the Iran-Contra affair has been questioned because the vice president has played a significant role in shaping Reagan administration policies toward both the Contras and terrorism. 
The vice president, who directed the Central Intelligence Agency during the Ford administration, has met with, and given encouragement to, the Nicaraguan rebels. 
And his son, John Bush, has helped funnel private "humanitarian" aid to the Contras. 

   The vice president was chairman of an administration task force on terrorism. 
It issued a report in February declaring: "The U.S. will make no concessions to terrorists. 
It will not pay ransoms, change its policies, or agree to other acts that might encourage additional terrorism." 

   Defendants charged in a New York case with breaking the U.S. embargo against arms sales to Iran contend that they expected to get approval of their shipments from the vice president's office. 
Mr. Bush's office has denied having any relationship with the defendants. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
