ID: 128	RANK: 35	SCORE: 5.911469
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880324-0035 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Says Car, Japanese Auto Makers Say Truck, Customs Isn't About to Call the Whole Thing Off </HL>
<AUTHOR> Melinda Grenier Guiles (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> C NSANY GM TOYOY JAPAN </CO>
<IN> AUT MON </IN>
<G> TRE </G>
<TEXT>
   It sounds like a joke from a comedy skit about pointy-headed bureaucrats: Government officials are trying to discern the difference between a truck and a car. 

   But the question is no joke to federal agencies currently wrestling with the problem. 
It's also no laughing matter to several Japanese auto makers whose shipments to the U.S. are restricted by Japan's export quota. 

   Government and industry sources say the U.S. Customs Service could shed some light on the controversy as early as today. 
The agency is expected to respond to Japanese manufacturers who complained when customs proposed reclassifying as cars the Jeeplike sport utility vehicles they have been exporting as trucks. 

   This latest round in U.S.-Japan trade tensions began last fall when Rep. John D. Dingell (D., Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, decided some Japanese auto makers were trying to circumvent the auto export quota by classifying their sport utility models as trucks. 
Besides alerting customs of his concerns, Mr. Dingell also recently asked the General Accounting Office to look into the matter. 

   A change in the classification would be more than just academic. 
It could create serious problems for such companies as Suzuki Motor Co. and Isuzu Motors Ltd., who aren't allowed to export many cars here and who depend on sport utility vehicles in the U.S. 

   "These things represent a significant part of our sales, no question," says a spokesman for Isuzu's U.S. unit. 

   The roots of the conflict go back seven years. 
When Japan adopted its 1,680,000-car quota (now 2.3 million) in 1981, the question of how to classify sport utility vehicles wasn't a major issue. 
Most of the domestic and foreign-made models were spartan, truck-based, off-road buggies with no back seats and few amenities. 
Only one Japanese manufacturer, Toyota Motor Corp., exported them to the U.S. anyway. 

   So Japan set up a small, separate quota of about 82,000 vehicles (now 100,000) to cover station wagons and the few sport utility "cars" shipped here with back seats. 
The sport utility models that entered the U.S. without back seats were classified as trucks. 
Truck exports haven't been restricted but face a 25% U.S. tariff, compared with the 2.5% tariff levied on cars. 

   Then sales of sport utility vehicles took off, as companies gussied them up to broaden their appeal. 
Sales of Japanese-made models nearly reached 200,000 here in 1987 -- stealing some sales from their U.S.-made cousins. 
Many of the Japanese vehicles, like their domestic counterparts, offer such carlike features as cut-pile carpeting and AM-FM stereo radio. 
Most also have back seats -- installed at the U.S. port or the dealership after the vehicles clear customs as trucks. 

   "In a recent survey of Suzuki Samurai buyers, the majority of new owners who were replacing a vehicle were replacing a car, not a truck," crowed a Suzuki of America Automotive Corp. press release issued about a year after Samurai's November 1985 debut. 
"The fact that so many subcompact buyers are turning to the Samurai is evidence of the vehicle's appeal in that category." 

   That's precisely Mr. Dingell's point. 
If people use sport utility vehicles as substitutes for cars, the vehicles should be considered cars for tariff and quota purposes. 
At his urging, the Customs Service last year ordered its field offices to take a closer look at the situation. 
"Absence of rear passenger seating is not conclusive evidence of classification," the department said in a message that ordered its agents to be on the lookout for such "passenger amenities" in the rear compartment as carpeting, insulation, "windows that open," ventilation ducts, audio speakers, ashtrays, armrests and "similar features typical of a vehicle designed for transport of persons rather than cargo." 

   The department's Los Angeles district office promptly proposed reclassifying a number of sport utility vehicles. 
The U.S. sales arms of Mitsubishi Motors Corp., Suzuki, Isuzu, and Toyota separately protested. 
The companies insist that they comply with customs regulations, which assign a classification based on the vehicle's condition "as imported." 
Still, Mitsubishi and Toyota stopped most shipments of their sport utility "trucks." 

   Mitsubishi now plans to resume shipments April 1, says Richard D. Recchia, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America Inc. Toyota is "contemplating" a similar move, says a Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A. spokeswoman, who didn't indicate a target date. 
Both companies say they are changing their position because they expect customs to affirm the truck classification of the affected vehicles already shipped here. 
What they don't know is what customs "is going to say about the future," says Mr. Recchia. 

   Customs could decide to change the criteria for classification, a process that would likely take at least a few months. 
Customs also has to respond to the protests filed last year. 

   Suzuki and Isuzu, both partly owned by General Motors Corp., would be hurt the most if a reclassification is ultimately approved. 
Both have tiny car quotas with little hope of expansion given Japan's recent decision to hold the restraints at the current level. 
About 96% of the vehicles Suzuki sold in the U.S. in 1987 were brought into the U.S. as trucks. 
About a third of all Isuzu models sold here were sport utility "trucks." 

   The continuing slowdown in sales of Japanese cars could help untie the knot. 
Higher prices caused by the strength of the Japanese yen have made it difficult, if not impossible, for most of the Japanese companies to sell their car-quota allocations. 
Thus, some companies say it won't hurt as much now to call their sport utility vehicles cars. 
It also might be possible for Isuzu and Suzuki to get a bit of their competitors' "leftover" allocations. 

   Some news indicating what will finally happen should come "pretty quickly," says a Customs Service spokesman. 
He and a spokesman for Rep. Dingell confirmed that the congressman and Customs Commissioner William von Rabb met late yesterday to discuss the classification issue, although neither would say exactly what the discussion covered. 

   The customs spokesman said the problem is particularly difficult because it involves "a significant revenue issue." 
One U.S. official estimated that the government takes in about $200 million a year from the 25% tariff on the sport utility "trucks." 
Reclassifying these models as cars, with the 2.5% tariff, would sharply cut that total. 
The lower tariff could mean lower prices as well, although the companies could choose to pocket the difference. 

   "But you also have to look at it in the spirit of the law and good trade relations," he added. 
"There's a lot of strong arguments here." 

   ---

          Japanese-made Sport Utility Vehicles
                                 Imported As
                               Cars       Trucks    Total
  Suzuki Samurai              3,000       78,349   81,349
  Isuzu Trooper               2,100       40,212   42,312
  Toyota 4 Runner             3,635       31,423   35,058
  Dodge Raider*                   0       19,539   19,539
  Mitsubishi Montero          2,013        8,912   10,925
  Nissan Pathfinder           5,314            0    5,314
  Total                      16,062      178,435  194,497
   * Raider made by Mitsubishi for Chrysler Corp.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
