ID: 128	RANK: 45	SCORE: 5.624120
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870610-0108 </DOCNO>
<HL> SHOP TALK:
Forget the Lessons;
What Firm Was It?
---
By Jeffrey A. Tannenbaum, Melinda Grenier Guiles,
Frederick Rose and James B. Stewart</HL>
<DD> 06/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> OXY
AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   This whistle-blower has his limits. 

   A New York public-relations executive, Don Rosendale, told readers of last Sunday's New York Times Magazine about the grim aftermath of his discovering financial irregularities at a former employer. 
Instead of being congratulated for "stanching a torrent of cash pouring from a corporation that could ill afford to lose it," Mr. Rosendale was forced out from his vice presidency. 
"The path I chose was brutal on my family and cost me tens of thousands in lost income," he wrote. 

   Which company allegedly forced out Mr. Rosendale? 
He won't say. 
"It doesn't matter which company was involved," Mr. Rosendale says. 
"What was important was my observations and reactions and the value they may have to others faced with the choice of to whistle-blow or not." 

   Still, Mr. Rosendale will say that he has only worked for PepsiCo Inc., Norton Simon Inc., AMF Inc. and Trans World Airlines Inc. 

   Norton Simon has, after several mergers, become part of BCI Holdings Corp., Chicago. 
"I never heard of him," a BCI spokesman says of Mr. Rosendale. 
A TWA spokesman says, "I have no idea whether it's TWA." 
AMF now is a unit of Minstar Inc. in Minneapolis; its attorney hadn't any comment. 
And PepsiCo says that Mr. Rosendale was never a vice president of the firm, and therefore he wasn't writing about PepsiCo. 

   When Good Is Bad
   Most companies want to hide their bad news. 
Suzuki of America Automotive Corp. apparently wants to hide the good. 

   The U.S. sales arm of Japanese auto maker Suzuki Motor Co. told reporters last week that it won't give out monthly sales figures "for the forseeable future." 
Companies routinely release these numbers for use by the press, government and interested customers, dealers and other firms. 

   Suzuki would only say that it doesn't "want our potential competition to measure the level of consumer interest" in the Samurai -- the company's inexpensive, four-wheel-drive Jeep-like vehicle. 

   But John Hammond, an auto-industry analyst at J. D. Power and Associates, has a theory. 
He thinks Suzuki may feel Samurai sales -- which rose more than 100% for the first four months of this year from the year earlier -- have been too good. 
He says several foreign companies plan to sell Samurai-like vehicles in the U.S. and Suzuki doesn't "want people to understand the market potential for these vehicles." 

   What a Perk! 

   Occidental Petroleum Corp. shareholders get benefits that other shareholders can only dream about. 

   At its recent annual meeting, Occidental promised to rebate $10 to each shareholder who buys a copy of Armand Hammer's recently published autobiography. 
Coupons for the rebates were distributed at a large booth plastered with accolades for the venerable chairman and chief executive officer's book, which lists for $22.95. 

   "We did it for shareholder interest," says a company spokesman. 
And indeed shareholders have a right to be interested. 
Occidental already has committed more than $500,000 to publish the autobiography and a companion publication, a glossy collection of photos of Dr. Hammer. 

   What Price Glory:
   To hear People magazine tell it, Lynn Armandt was hounded by reporters until she had to tell all to People. 
The "story would never be laid to rest and my life would never return to normal until I made a statement," Ms. Armandt explains in People's current cover story, "Chronicle of a Ruinous Affair." 

   Ms. Armandt, of course, was Donna Rice's companion on the now infamous weekends on the yacht Monkey Business and in Gary Hart's Washington townhouse. 
Her article fails to mention, however, another small reason she may have broken her silence -- and why she chose People as the forum in which to do it. 
That is: People paid her $125,000 for the interview on which the story was based, according to People staffers. (That's a lot, but less than the $200,000 cited by Donna Rice's lawyer. 
A spokeswoman for Ms. Rice says that the $200,000 was "speculation.") 

   Elizabeth Wagner, a spokeswoman for People, declined to comment on whether Ms. Armandt had been paid at all. 
Ms. Armandt, the proprietor of a bikini boutique near Miami, couldn't be reached. 

   Meanwhile, although it's still too soon to get sales figures for the issue, which went on sale at newsstands Monday, "the early word we're getting is that it's selling extremely well," says Ms. Wagner. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
