ID: 128	RANK: 48	SCORE: 5.608487
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861219-0002 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's News --
World-Wide</HL>
<DD> 12/19/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   POINDEXTER PERSUADED Meese to sidetrack Contra arms inquiries. 

   A Justice Department spokesman confirmed that Meese agreed in late October to delay criminal investigations of arms shipments to Nicaraguan rebels. 
Poindexter and other officials feared the probes could endanger efforts to free U.S. hostages in the Mideast and expose links to weapons sales to Iran. 
Meanwhile, Bush thinks Chief of Staff Regan should resign, but apparently hasn't raised the issue with Reagan, according to associates of the vice president. 

   Casey underwent surgery that removed a cancerous tumor from his brain. 
Doctors at Georgetown University Hospital said they won't be certain of the CIA chief's prognosis until tests are completed next week. 
It was unclear whether Casey would return to his post. 

   Former National Security Adviser McFarlane stood by his testimony that Reagan approved in advance the first shipment of U.S. arms to Iran. 

   ---
   Hasenfus arrived in the U.S., where he probably will be questioned by congressional investigators studying the Iran-Contra operation. 
The U.S. mercenary, who was convicted of helping ship weapons to Nicaragua's anti-government rebels and sentenced to 30 years in prison, was pardoned and freed Wednesday by Managua. 

   Sen. Dodd confirmed that an American jailed in Nicaragua on suspicion of espionage is the brother of a U.S. congressman from Ohio. 
The Connecticut Democrat was the first U.S. official allowed to meet the American, Sam N. Hall. 

   ---
   Vietnam named Nguyen Van Linh, a 71-year-old economic pragmatist, as Communist Party head. 
The step signals consensus that economic change is needed and was prodded by internal grumbling and Hanoi's Soviet benefactors. 

   ---
   Britain will buy Boeing's Awacs early-warning aircraft, ending what Defense Secretary Younger called the "sad story" of the competing British radar plane, Nimrod. 
He said the decision to purchase as many as eight of the U.S.-built planes for about $1.4 billion was based on advice that Nimrod wasn't reliable. 

   ---
   The Soviet Union said it will end its unilateral nuclear test moratorium after the first U.S. test next year. 
The moratorium, which began Aug. 6, 1985, had been extended four times. 
Moscow cited Washington's pursuit of the space-based antimissile program. 
Reagan officials said the new Soviet move wouldn't affect U.S. policy. 

   ---
   The Soviet news agency Tass issued an unprecedented report on riots in Alma Ata, capital of the Central Asian Republic of Kazakhstan. 
Tass didn't give any casualty figures. 
The disturbance was apparently prompted by the dismissal Tuesday of the republic's Communist Party chief, who was succeeded by an ethnic Russian. 

   ---
   The aircraft Voyager crossed the halfway point in its attempt to circle the Earth without stopping or refueling. 
The experimental plane passed Somalia on the fifth day of a 10-day flight. 
Ground controllers in California said their concern that the plane may have been burning too much fuel could have been caused by a faulty gauge. 

   ---
   The State Department said career diplomat Arthur Hartman, U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union for more than five years, will leave the post next year. 
The agency said Hartman, 60, was resigning for "personal reasons," but didn't elaborate. 

   ---
   The White House authorized a former ambassador's Libyan contacts, an Italian newspaper said. 
Quoting unidentified sources, the paper said two former U.S. national security advisers approved Vatican envoy Wilson's meeting with Gadhafi last year. 
Wilson was reprimanded by the State Department at the time and later quit. 

   ---
   The FAA's chief physician won't certify commercial pilots as fit to fly unless a medical advisory panel concurs in the decision, agency officials said. 
In recent weeks, there has been criticism that Dr. Frank Austin, FAA air surgeon, approved medical appeals of pilots deemed unfit to fly. 

   ---
   Former Emperor Bokassa denied ordering summary executions during a 14-year regime in the Central African Republic. 
Bokassa, who returned to the country after exile in France, told a court that he accepted moral responsibility for the killings of government officials and military aides. 
He is being tried for murder and treason. 

   ---
   Chad began receiving as much as $15 million in emergency U.S. military aid aimed at helping the African nation repel Libyan attacks, the State Department said. 
A spokesman said light arms, ammunition and clothing were shipped Dec. 4. 

   ---
   Education Secretary Bennett named 16 school districts in eight states as laboratories for wide-ranging changes recently endorsed by the National Governors Association. 
Each district will take steps to upgrade teaching, expand parents' choice over schools their children will attend and review the quality of higher education. 

   ---
   Pakistani troops moved into four more trouble spots as Moslem riots that flared over the weekend in Karachi continued. 
Police said soldiers were sent to two Karachi suburbs and two other cities after a crowd of about 400 attacked a police station. 

   ---
   Palestinian guerrillas battled Shiite Moslems at two refugee camps in Beirut despite Iranian peace efforts. 
Druse Moslem militia leader Walid Jumblatt blamed the stalemate on PLO chief Arafat's fighters. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
