ID: 128	RANK: 57	SCORE: 5.432111
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880408-0001 </DOCNO>
<HL> Nixon Proves to Be Perceptive Pundit, Urges Mideast as Presidential Priority </HL>
<AUTHOR> Karen Elliott House (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Fourteen years out of power, Richard Nixon is still a perceptive political prophet. 

   Sitting down on the day of the Iowa caucuses for an interview on the global role of American power, Mr. Nixon goes first to the topic he loves most: American politics. 
The interview is embargoed until now when his new book, "1999: Victory Without War," is being published. 
Speaking before anyone has tallied a vote, he makes predictions that so far are on target. 

   He says the Republicans will nominate Vice President George Bush and the Democrats will wind up choosing a nominee through negotiations at their convention. 

   Although Mr. Nixon's gait is slightly slowed at 75 years of age, his mind is quick. 
Striking a dispassionately analytical tone, he makes clear he finds none of the present crop of presidential candidates up to the job. 

   "The prospect of George Bush as president seems to make everyone ill at ease, nervous," he says. 

   Although Mr. Nixon won't say so directly, he strongly implies the prospect makes him ill at ease, too, though he appointed Mr. Bush as his ambassador to the United Nations. 

   "What this country needs," he says, "is a man like John Connally, mean and tough, who could go eye-to-eye with Mikhail Gorbachev and who could handle our economic problems." 
Mr. Nixon's admiration for his former treasury secretary hasn't cooled despite Mr. Connally's recent declaration of bankruptcy or his failed 1980 bid for the presidency. 
Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas, Mr. Nixon notes, is "selfish and mean enough" but, he predicts, those qualities will cost him the nomination. 
Sen. Dole ended his campaign last month. 

   The former president doesn't see in Mr. Bush the "independence" or the "drive" to lead a country whose global leadership is increasingly questioned, a subject Mr. Nixon examines in his new book. 
He further sees the vice president as "trapped by the establishment" and predicts that as president, he would rely too much on bureaucrats at the departments of State and Defense who, Mr. Nixon says, have "let down the country on foreign policy." 

   He also predicts that if elected, Mr. Bush will be a one-term president. 
"He will be 65 when inaugurated and no one is going to re-elect a 69-year-old man after living through President Reagan's second term," Mr. Nixon says. 

   As for the Democrats, he isn't certain who will emerge from the negotiations but predicts that a Democratic convention cliff-hanger will create "life, spark, enthusiasm" while the Republicans can expect a staid "coronation." 

   Whoever the new president is, Mr. Nixon urges that he focus immediately on the Middle East because 1989 is the only year he will have in which congressional or re-election politics don't dominate his thinking. 

   "You can't have progress in the Mideast without the U.S. playing the leading role. 
It has to be done at a high level, high profile, high pressure and get it done in 1989," he says. 
Otherwise, "the region will explode." 

   Mr. Nixon is imprecise about his prescription for a Mideast peace agreement except to say it must do three things: "provide secure borders for Israel, provide self-government for the Palestinians and avoid a major Russian role in the area." 

   Turning to America's role in the world, the topic of his new book, Mr. Nixon argues that the U.S. needn't be resigned to second-class status just because Japan has become the world's largest creditor and the U.S. its largest debtor. 
"We can be anything we will ourselves to be," he says. 

   He also doesn't believe Japan can be a world-class power. 
"No nation can be a power in a nuclear world without nuclear weapons and neither the U.S. nor the Soviets will stand for Japan to go nuclear," he says. 

   Mr. Nixon predicts that the biggest change in the global power alignment will be the emergence of China and the relative decline of the Soviet Union. 
"In 50 years, if the reforms continue, China will definitely be a military and economic superpower," he says. 
He warns, "One can't assume that Chinese foreign-policy intentions will always be benign." 

   Mr. Nixon all but forecloses the prospects of an alliance between Beijing and Moscow or Beijing and Tokyo. 

   So, he says, the challenge for the U.S. is to play balance-of-power politics with all three: Japan, China and the Soviet Union. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
