ID: 128	RANK: 6	SCORE: 7.754191
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870902-0167 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sport-Utility
Vehicles Tap
Market Niches
---
By Stephen Buckley
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> C GM F
AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   When Melvin Adams bought his first sport-utility vehicle, a Chevrolet Blazer, back in 1975, he mainly wanted the four-wheel-drive function to help battle treacherous winter roads. 

   Last year, Mr. Adams bought a new compact S10 Blazer for outdoor recreation and hunting -- and for his wife's daily use around town. 
Nowadays, "you can drive them to something like a wedding and no one will care," says Mr. Adams, a vice president of Coleman Co., a camping-equipment concern based in Wichita, Kan. 
"They're more socially acceptable." 

   Indeed, sport-utility vehicles have surged in popularity in recent years. 
U.S. sales are expected to reach 820,000 this year, more than six times the 132,000 sold in 1982 when the boom began. 

   The big reason for the increase has been the rapid proliferation in models and the expanding array of buyers they have drawn, from teen-agers in search of cheap wheels to image-conscious young adults drawn by the vehicles' new high-status looks. 
In 1981, Americans had only 10 essentially similar models to choose from. 
Now there are twice as many, from the spartan, subcompact Suzuki Samurai that sells for $7,725, to the Range Rover, a new luxury British import that costs $31,900 and has attracted such buyers as actor Jack Nicholson and Queen Elizabeth II. 

   "You can get them as nice as a Cadillac," says Lance Kirk, general manager of Dick Hatfield Chevrolet in Augusta, Kan. 

   Until the 1980s, the sport-utilities were strictly plain vanilla -- unadorned work vehicles or fun-mobiles mainly for off-road use. 
On many models, the only options available were four-wheel-drive, power steering and air conditioning. 
Jeep, now owned by Chrysler Corp., long dominated the market, with a 36% share in 1977. 

   Today, manufacturers are scrambling to fill a variety of niches. 
A year ago, Jeep discontinued its CJ, a basic model directly descended from the World War II jeep, and introduced the Wrangler. 
"On the CJ, even the top and the doors were optional," says Martin Levine, general marketing manager for Chrysler's new Jeep/Eagle division. 
"On the Wrangler, things like leather interior, automatic transmission, stereo-cassette radio, rear-window defroster, not to mention the top and the doors, are all standard features." 
The company will introduce another upscale sport-utility entry, called the ZJ, probably within the next two years, he adds. 

   Nonetheless, Jeep envies the success of Suzuki Motor Co. at the other end of the market. 
The Japanese company has sold a hefty 91,000 Samurais since introducing the vehicle in the U.S. less than two years ago. 
Mr. Levine says Jeep/Eagle is "studying the lower end of the market" for a possible new entry. 
So is Yugo America, which wants to challenge the Samurai with its own vehicle priced under $9,000. 

   Suzuki, meanwhile, plans to counterattack with an upscale model targeted at an older audience than Samurai buyers, says N. Douglas Mazza, vice president and general manager of the company's U.S. unit. 

   General Motors Corp.'s Chevrolet division -- which now leads the 10 sport-utility makers with 28% of the market -- will soon introduce a sleeker version of the S10 Blazer, called the Serengeti, with all-leather interior and paint-trim wheels. 

   Will all these new models find enough buyers? 
The 7% increase expected in sport-utility sales this year is certainly healthy in a year when car sales are down. 
But the sort of double-digit annual sales gains that occurred between 1982 and 1985 probably won't return, if only because the overall sales volume is now so large. 

   Some dealers and market analysts fear the boom may wane because current owners are starting to have families, and thus are looking for bigger vehicles. 
Both GM and Ford Motor Co., which makes the Bronco line, will address that problem by introducing four-door compacts by 1991. 

   "Our sales (of Toyota Motor Corp.'s two-door 4Runner model) are down, and I think people wanting a four-door vehicle is part of it," says Robert Bowling, general manager of Seeger Toyota in Creve Coeur, Mo. 
"A four-door is better for car pooling, better for kids, better for cargo." 
Toyota at this time has no plans for a four-door model, a spokesman says. 

   Manufacturers may hit on other new marketing strategies as well. 
Suzuki, for instance, may begin to stress the Samurai's commercial uses. 
"It's a growing incremental part of our business that we think is important," says Mr. Mazza. 
Suzuki recently gave a Samurai to the city of Brea, Calif., home of the company's U.S. headquarters, "and now they've assigned it to their water company." 

   (See: "Corrections &amp; Amplifications: Leather Interior" -- WSJ Sept. 4, 1987) 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
