ID: 128	RANK: 67	SCORE: 5.268517
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880321-0029 </DOCNO>
<HL> GM Studying Plan To Rename Imports Sold by Chevrolet --- 'Geo' Vehicles Would Carry The First New Nameplate Since Pontiac's '26 Debut </HL>
<AUTHOR> John Bussey and Gary Lamphier (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> TOYOY GM </CO>
<IN> AUT </IN>
<TEXT>
   General Motors Corp.'s Chevrolet division is considering a radical cure for slumping sales of its imported and joint-venture subcompacts. 
The formula includes giving those vehicles GM's first new nameplate since 1926, when Pontiac was introduced. 

   GM is quietly telling dealers of plans -- officially tentative, but apparently well under way -- for a new nameplate called "Geo." 
Chevrolet will market renamed versions of its Nova, Sprint and Spectrum under the new badge, hoping to sharpen the identity of what is now a muddled array of subcompacts. 
The division also plans to include a new imported Jeep-like sport-utility vehicle in the line, according to dealers and company sources. 

   It isn't clear whether the vehicles will retain the Chevrolet name or just carry the Chevy "bow tie" emblem. 
In any event, Chevrolet hopes to launch Geo this fall, almost two years before the debut of GM's Saturn car line, another new nameplate that, unlike Geo, will also be a separate franchise. 

   With Geo, the auto maker is stopping just short of setting up a new franchise to market the cars, which have suffered from an is-it-an-import-or-is-it-a-Chevy identity crisis. 
Instead, Chevrolet wants to require dealers to set up a separate display area in existing showrooms just for Geo. 
In high volume markets, GM will encourage dealers to build separate showrooms for the new nameplate. 

   Initial dealer reaction is positive. 
"The concept is just fantastic," says Bill Walsh, a Chevrolet dealer in Ottawa, Ill., and past chairman of Chevrolet's national dealer advisory council. 
"We'll have a better opportunity to market our cars to import buyers." 

   A GM spokeswoman would say only that Chevrolet is talking with its 5,000 dealers about a strategy to beef up sales to import buyers. 
"It's subject to change at any time," she said. 
"It's not a done deal." 

   Chevrolet's travails are, in part, merely a sign of the times. 
With import quality having enormous appeal for U.S. consumers, the Big Three have taken to buying foreign-made cars and selling them under their own nameplates. 
The strategy is most evident in the small, entry-level car end of the industry, a large part of which U.S. auto makers have ceded to foreign competition. 

   But marketing imports created a set of new problems: how to convince import buyers to come into a domestic-car showroom, and how to sell the imports without implying that the nearby U.S. cars are inferior. 
Dealers must explain to customers that it really isn't a Chevrolet Sprint, but a subcompact made by Suzuki Motor Co. of Japan, imported and rebadged by GM. 
And the Chevrolet Spectrum? 
Well, that's made by Japan's Isuzu Motors Ltd. 
The Chevrolet Nova has an even more ambiguous pedigree: It is a spinoff of the Toyota Corolla assembled in a Japanese-managed joint venture of Toyota Motor Corp. and GM in Fremont, Calif. 

   "It is muddled and it is confusing," says Roger Williams, president of Jack Williams Automall in Fort Worth, Texas. 
Chevrolet also sells the U.S.-made Cavalier, Corsica and Beretta compacts, giving it a total of six models in roughly the same price/size category. 

   The result: combined sales of the Sprint, Spectrum and Nova plummeted 18% to 272,167 cars in 1987. 

   Now, Chevy wants to reverse all that by essentially setting up an import store within its existing showrooms. 
By using a common name for all its foreign-made vehicles, Chevrolet hopes to better focus its marketing. 
Dealers could pitch a single nameplate, rather than a smorgasbord of imports. 

   According to current plans, the second generation Chevy Sprint will be called the Geo Metro and will be introduced this year as a 1989 model. 
The new version of the Nova will be named the Prizm and will come out as a 1989 or 1990 model. 
The next generation Spectrum becomes the Storm and is scheduled to be launched in October 1989 as a 1990 model. 

   Chevrolet also plans to introduce this fall a sport utility vehicle, the Geo Tracker, made by Suzuki and similar to the Japanese auto maker's popular Samurai model. 
One company source said Chevy is thinking of eventually introducing other vehicles under the Geo name as well. (Geo wouldn't include the LeMans, imported from Daewoo Motor Co. of South Korea and sold through the Pontiac division.) 

   "It's great," says Mr. Williams, the Texas dealer. 
"I'll end up building a separate showroom for it. 
The way I look at it, I just captured another franchise." 

   Meanwhile, in Canada, GM is taking an import-marketing tack that may be a test case for Geo. 
Last May, the auto maker's Canadian unit launched a separate network of dealers, called Passport, to sell certain GM imports. 
The network has 16 dealers so far. 

   There is irony in the Geo and Passport moves. 
The biggest auto maker in North America, GM is actually playing down its own name to give its import operations a boost. 

   The Passport operation is run out of an office in a shopping mall separate from GM's Canadian headquarters in Oshawa, Ontario. 
At one Passport dealership near Toronto, GM's name appears only on an inside wall where GM financing is being peddled. 

   Outside a second Toronto area Passport showroom, passers-by express surprise at the outlet's link to GM. 
"I thought it was a Hyundai dealership," says one. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
