ID: 128	RANK: 7	SCORE: 7.383060
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880912-0099 </DOCNO>
<HL> Different Data Lies Behind Samurai Dispute </HL>
<AUTHOR> Bradley A. Stertz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> AUT </IN>
<G> TRN </G>
<TEXT>
   Consumers might be forgiven for being confused. 
In June, Consumer Reports magazine said the Suzuki Samurai "is so likely to roll over . . . that it is unfit for its intended use." 
But just this month a federal safety agency refused to order a recall and said the Samurai is no more unsafe than any Jeep-like vehicle. 

   Were they talking about the same car? 
Yes -- but they were basing their judgments on different statistics and road tests. 

   "Under circumstances like these, you have to wonder where consumers can go to get unbiased information," says George Hoffer, professor of automotive economics at Virginia Commonwealth University. 
"The weakness with the system is that people can design their tests to come up with whatever data they want." 

   That was certainly the case with Suzuki Motor Co.'s Samurai. 
In its analysis of the Samurai's safety, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration focused on fatality rates; those numbers showed fatalities from rollovers involving Ford Motor Co.'s Bronco II occur three times as often as Samurai rollover deaths. 

   Based on those figures, NHTSA officials say they saw no reason to open an extensive safety investigation into the Samurai, despite the Consumer Reports article. 
"We looked at other statistics," says NHTSA spokesman Tim Hurd. 
"But the fatality rates seemed to overwhelmingly suggest there wasn't anything uniquely wrong with the Samurai." 

   But Consumers Union of U.S. Inc., the publisher of Consumer Reports, chose to use different numbers when it condemned the vehicle, citing NHTSA crash-avoidance surveys taken in four states in 1986. 
The statistics showed Samurais rolling over in 64% of all single-vehicle accidents (those where only a Samurai was involved). 
That compared with a 49% rate for the now-discontinued Jeep CJ-5, which has been a target of rollover charges for years. 

   "We thought our numbers . . . showed reason for some serious concern," says Robert Knoll, the chief of Consumers Union's auto-testing division. 

   The two sides were also at odds on the road tests. 
Consumers Union ran the Samurai through the same course it uses to test all vehicles. 
On a maneuver to suddenly avoid an object in the road, the Samurai began tipping over. 

   Suzuki and NHTSA argue that Consumers Union's tests aren't reliable. 
"We used tests that have been approved by engineers and in use by the auto industry for a long time," says Douglas Mazza, vice president and general manager of Suzuki's U.S. sales arm. 
"The tests used by Consumers Union were not instrumented, were not recorded and were not scientific." 

   Mr. Knoll disputes such contentions. 
"Our tests replicate what will happen to drivers in the real world," he says. 
"In one of theirs, they drive around and around in a circle at faster speeds. 
I have to wonder how often that happens on roadways?" 

   Mr. Knoll notes -- and NHTSA's Mr. Hurd confirms -- that NHTSA didn't do its own testing of the Samurai. 

   Although NHTSA declined to investigate the Samurai, it did agree to start developing tests to evaluate rollover risks for all vehicles. 
While the safety of sport-utility vehicles has been an issue for more than a decade, there's still no standard driving test to determine whether individual models are prone to roll over. 

   This isn't the first time NHTSA has gotten into a fight over safety statistics. 

   In 1984, NHTSA Administrator Diane Steed told Congress that deaths from automatic-shift Ford Motor Co. vehicles slipping from "park" to "reverse" were declining substantially after a settlement that made Ford install warning stickers in the cars. 
Using its own fatality data, NHTSA said deaths dropped by 300% following the 1980 settlement. 

   A General Accounting Office study a year later, though, said there had been a delay in reporting many deaths. 
As a result, the GAO study stated, deaths in Ford park-to-reverse cases had actually increased after the 1980 settlement. 

   At that point, NHTSA decided to switch to the number of reported park-to-reverse incidents instead of the fatality figures. 
The new data showed park-to-reverse accidents declining. 
That data wasn't generated independently; instead it was provided by Ford. 

   NHTSA at the time said they changed to different numbers because the total fatalities were not high enough to generate accurate statistics. 
NHTSA won't comment further on the Ford case. 

   But NHTSA's critics see parallels with the Samurai. 
"With Ford and with Suzuki," says Clarence Ditlow, director of the Washington-based Center for Auto Safety, "it was a matter of NHTSA having a pre-ordained position, and demonstrating its ability to develop numbers to support that position." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
