ID: 128	RANK: 77	SCORE: 5.185215
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880824-0081 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Auto Makers Decide Safety Sells --- But Tactics Vary On Air Bags, Other Devices </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joseph B. White (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> GM F C </CO>
<IN> AUT </IN>
<DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   After years of saying that safety doesn't sell, U.S. auto makers are suddenly beginning to sound like Ralph Nader. 

   "You won't hear any more beefs about air bags from me," crows a two-page newspaper ad from Chrysler Corp. Chairman Lee Iacocca, a one-time air-bag opponent who is now pledging to put them on all his U.S.-built cars by 1990. 
General Motors Corp., meanwhile, is running ads playing up the formation of an in-house medical team dedicated to crash-injury research. 
And both companies are in a race with Ford Motor Co. to offer state-of-the-art braking systems in more of their cars. 

   Why this sudden turnabout? 
The primary reason is demand: Auto makers are scrambling to satisfy the growing number of consumers who say they want more safety features in their cars. 
"We're trying to . . . respond to what our customers are telling us," says Helen O. Petrauskas, Ford's vice president for safety. 

   And as they chase the market, manufacturers are perfecting a whole new generation of safety equipment, including air bags, anti-lock brakes, four-wheel steering, self-leveling suspensions, fighter jet-style instrument displays and electronic collision-avoidance systems. 

   None of these things are cheap, and consumers who want the state-of-the-art in safety will either have to pay a high price for ownership today or hope for costs to come down tomorrow. 
Indeed, auto makers are still trying to figure out how much they can charge for their new safety features. 
"Does safety sell? 
The answer is yes," says Mark Herrmann, president of the New York-based Mark Buick dealership. 
"The question is, at what price?" 

   One thing is clear: The interest is there. 
And the overriding reason for this is that, in the 25 years since Mr. Nader's book "Unsafe at Any Speed" made automobile safety a national issue, car buyers have been bombarded with increasing amounts of information about the relative merits -- and demerits -- of the various makes of cars. 
The news comes from consumer groups; government regulators, who publish the results of crash tests; and insurance companies, which charge more to insure cars with poor safety records than those with good. 

   Foreign auto makers also have played a part in stirring up interest. 
They were the first to introduce high-tech safety systems into the U.S. -- and when they did, they sold them as virtues not to be found in any cars but their own. 

   Now, consumers are shunning any automobile with a poor safety image. 
When the Audi 5000 luxury sedan was hit with the charge that it could suddenly accelerate on its own, sales of the car plummeted. 
And in June, sales of Suzuki Motor Co.'s Samurai sport utility vehicle plunged 70%, following allegations that it rolls over too easily in sharp turns. 

   The result is that U.S. auto makers are embracing even low-tech safety features, including some they had previously resisted, such as back-seat shoulder harnesses. 
Though not required by law, these belts will become standard equipment on most American cars by 1990. 

   But auto makers are focusing most of their attention on high-tech safety systems. 
Consider Mr. Iacocca's belated endorsement of driver's-side air bags. 
To fulfill the federal government's requirement that by 1990 all cars be outfitted with some kind of "passive" restraint, he could have opted for seat belts that automatically strap in a car's riders. 
Instead, he chose air bags -- "We want to put air bags in everything," says Chrysler's co-president, Robert A. Lutz. 

   Still, going that route is a gamble. 
While auto makers now agree that safety sells, there is no such unanimity on what equipment consumers really want, and at what price they will buy it. 
Unlike Chrysler, for example, GM doesn't think buyers are interested enough in air bags to buy them at current prices and cites the poor sales of its $850 air-bag option package. 

   "You finally get to a crossover point where the customer says, 'You can leave that (feature) off,'" says GM President Robert C. Stempel. (And, in fact, a recent poll of 200 vehicle-fleet managers by Runzheimer International Ltd., a Chicago-based consulting firm, found that only 20% of those surveyed would be willing to pay more than $150 for the air-bag option.) 
As a result, the company is planning to make air bags standard equipment on only about 14% of its 1990 models. 

   Chrysler says it will absorb the costs of making air bags standard equipment until at least 1990; it won't say how high it will push prices when it eventually does start charging for the feature. 
For its part, Ford is planning to put air bags on more than half of its cars before the 1990 deadline arrives; the company hasn't revealed how much they will add to the prices of those cars. 
And neither has GM, for those relatively few 1990 cars on which it plans to make the feature standard. 

   At the moment, what GM does think will sell are anti-lock brake systems (ABS), a feature that allows a driver to stop on wet or icy roads without skidding. 
"Right now, we think this coming year we may sell 150,000 or 200,000 ABS units," says Mr. Stempel. 
"I'll make a projection that by the early 1990s that number is going into the millions because of consumer demand." 

   And he may be right: Americans are "wildly enthusiastic" about anti-lock brakes, says Robert Kernish, a consultant with the marketing unit of consulting firm Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc. "There's a lot of feeling it should be standard. 
And a significant amount of feeling it should be government mandated." 

   Moreover, ABS is a feature that lends itself to dramatic sales demonstrations: Dealers can show videos of cars stopping safely on glare ice or encourage customers to jam on the brakes during test drives. 

   Still, for Mr. Stempel's prediction to come true, GM will have to make ABS an option that the masses can afford. 
Currently, it costs about $900, which may be too high. 
"Can you sell a $900 brake system in a $10,000 car? 
I think not," says Mr. Herrmann, the Buick dealer. 
Many customers ask about ABS, he says, but when they hear how much it costs, "we price ourselves right out of the market." 

   Ford discovered the dangers of ABS's cost when it made the feature standard on its Scorpio models in Europe in 1985. 
In Germany, the car suddenly became more expensive than its competitors, primarily GM's Opel Omega, and Ford's German market share slipped 1.8 percentage points between 1984 and 1986. 
Although not the only reason for the decline, "there is a cause and effect there," says Allan Gilmour, Ford's executive vice president for international operations. 
In the U.S., Ford includes ABS as standard equipment only on its top-of-the line Lincoln Continental and the features-loaded versions of its Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar XR-7. 

   These kinds of problems may explain why U.S. auto makers are approaching some new safety features with caution. 
Both GM and Ford, for example, could offer four-wheel steering on their cars; the option would make them more maneuverable and stable at high speeds by allowing all four wheels of the cars to turn, not just the front two. 
Instead, they are watching to see how Honda Motor Co. and Mazda Motor Co. fare with their own recently introduced versions. 
So far, only about 15% of the 30,000 1988 Honda Preludes sold here through July were ordered with the $1,330 four-wheel steering package. 

   One way to reduce the risks of introducing such features is to make sure they can be marketed in more ways than one. 
Ford, for example, is offering computerized, self-leveling suspension systems on its Lincoln Continental and Thunderbird Turbo Coupe models. 
The system is primarily a comfort option. 
But it also can hold these cars level and steady in panic-stop situations. 

   In the meantime, auto makers are continuing to work on the safety stuff of tomorrow -- and some of it seems straight out of Buck Rogers. 

   GM, for instance, is developing a headup instrument display using technology borrowed from military fighter planes. 
The system, which will be built into a limited edition version of the 1989 Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme, projects a digital readout of the car's speed onto the windshield so the driver can check it without looking away from the road. 
Researchers at both GM and Ford, meanwhile, are testing electronic collision-avoidance systems that would warn a driver when other vehicles behind the car get too close. 
The biggest problem: An affordable system generates too many false alarms. 

   ---

                     The Price of Safety
    When auto-fleet managers were asked if they would buy air bags at certain prices, they said:
    Percentage who would buy, if airbags cost:
    $ 50                                 33%
    $100                                 28%
    $150                                 19%
    $200                                  7%
    $250                                 13%
    Source: Runzheimer International Ltd.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
