ID: 128	RANK: 93	SCORE: 5.048104
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880615-0012 </DOCNO>
<HL> Merrill Scales Down London Ambitions --- U.S. Giant Spent Millions, But Failed to Build </HL>
<AUTHOR> Craig Forman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> MER </CO>
<IN> SCR </IN>
<DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In the euphoria that preceded the 1986 deregulation of London's financial markets, Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. had big plans. 
The Thundering Herd would hire the best and brightest in London, and give them the freedom to put America's leading stockbroker on top here, too. 

   Instead, Merrill is finding the going here tougher than expected, and in some areas it is even sliding backward. 
In the past four years, the Wall Street giant spent millions in London on new talent, new computers, and a new headquarters, complete with atrium and glass elevators. 
But as it expanded, Merrill failed to build a team. 
As a result, its stars separated into fiefdoms, fighting over bonuses, resources and credit for deals. 

   When returns were lackluster, management was quick to change organization and strategy, leaving staffers here bitter and confused. 
In short, the London office seems to be a victim of its own over-ambition and infighting, complicated by the October market crash. 

   Now the focus is shifting to the U.S. Monday, Merrill named John G. Heimann, vice chairman of its capital markets unit, to the additional post of chief executive of the London unit. 

   Merrill, says Giovanni Franzi, a managing director who quit last year, is "virtually unrecognizable" from a few years ago. 
Adds another managing director who quit earlier this year but continues to do business with Merrill: "The Europeans (within Merrill's upper management in London) destroyed each other." 

   Now, as the firm concentrates on its performance in the U.S., London "is much more a part of (Merrill's) landscape," says Perrin Long of Lipper Analytical Securities Corp. 

   Merrill's turmoil is shared by most big U.S. and international banks and securities houses in London. 
Many, including Salomon Brothers Inc. and Security Pacific Corp., have made top management changes here as they try to figure out London's role in their global strategy. 
After spending billions to gear up for the global markets era, securities firms here find returns are disappointing and competition is tough. 
The fallout from October's crash makes matters worse. 
Trading volume is sharply lower and investors are more jittery about playing global markets. 

   But no firm seemed more eager to succeed in London than Merrill. 
In 1986, it became the first U.S. firm to join London's stock exchange. 
It was among the first foreign firms to apply for a primary dealership in British government bonds, or gilts. 
It hired Britain's best-known British-bond trader, John Hutchinson, to lead its assault on Britain's debt market, but lost millions of dollars when it tried to muscle in by cutting margins. 
After poaching 10 highfliers from market leader Credit Suisse First Boston, Merrill leapt to No. 2 Eurobond underwriter in 1985. 
Then, the $650 billion market hit the skids, and Merrill plummeted to 14th last year, ranking seventh today. 

   Merrill hired top European investment bankers who racked up successes in British mergers and acquisitions. 
But an alleged insider-trading scheme led Merrill to fire London-based M&amp;A chief Nahum Vaskevitch in March 1987, and the M&amp;A squad lost momentum. 
Today, Merrill doesn't rank in the top 20 British bid advisers. 

   After roughly doubling its London staff to 1,600 last year from 1985, Merrill is backpeddling. 
This year, the staff here shrank about 12%, mostly through layoffs. 
Former senior executives say the London capital-markets operation didn't make a profit last year or the year before. 
Analysts say it may not be making much now. 

   But the unit's chairman, Stanislas Yassukovich, says that with "one or two exceptions," businesses here were profitable both years. 
He stresses that Merrill's accounting procedures don't break down profits for London. 
He also notes, however, that space in Merrill's new London headquarters easily can be sublet. 

   Merrill has had more upheaval at the top than any U.S. firm here, changing senior management four times in two years. 
Eight managing directors quit in the past 18 months. 
Before Mr. Heimann's appointment, the chief executive's office was empty for seven months, administered by a five-man executive committee. 

   Merrill's tightening of reporting to New York divisional bosses is "more logical," says J. Michael Giles, an executive committee member. 
"Rather than thinking about Merrill Lynch Europe as a self-contained bank or securities company which was going to be pre-eminent, substantial, on top of this or that in a pure European context, we said -- and this is maybe where some tensions have come in -- that probably doesn't make sense." 

   Merrill's attempt to be a major player in the clubby British gilts market, the world's third-biggest government securities market, best illustrates how its hubris and good intentions led it awry. 

   Merrill hired Mr. Hutchinson and assembled a top-notch team. 
The market, dominated by a handful of small firms, opened in late 1986 to two dozen international competitors. 
Merrill used its financial clout to absorb losses as it cut margins and traded big positions, soon grabbing an estimated 20% market share and luring major British institutional clients. 

   But the institutions returned to their traditional British brokers when Merrill began raising margins. 
As losses grew, Merrill pulled back. 
Mr. Hutchinson, who declines to comment, resigned, and the firm now is estimated by analysts to have less than a 4% market-share. 

   Merrill's overriding problem was management. 
"Nobody was controlling day-to-day aspects," says Carole Jones, a vice president laid off this year. 
Mr. Franzi says the firm's stars lacked "a cohesive way of thinking and working together." 

   Merrill's way of calculating bonuses led to infighting among deal makers and stymied integration of the European operations. 
By putting a premium on individual performance, the bonus system led some staffers to contact clients separately about the same transaction or keep information about possible transactions to themselves. 
Investment bankers also clashed over fees. 
Mr. Giles says Merrill now looks more to "team spirit" in determining bonuses. 

   Even when trying to right itself, Merrill stumbled. 
It tried to recruit Christopher Reeves as chief executive. 
He resigned last year as chief executive of Morgan Grenfell Group PLC under pressure from the Bank of England. 
Morgan Grenfell was the main merchant bank adviser to Guinness PLC during its 1986 takeover of Distillers Co. 
The British government is investigating possibly illegal share-price manipulation in the takeover. 
Although Mr. Reeves wasn't implicated in any wrongdoing, he was bound to be a controversial choice for Merrill. 
The idea, which apparently originated in New York, didn't please the Bank of England, says a British monetary official. 

   Mr. Reeves is a consultant at Merrill in London, helping complete a European strategic review. 
The firm won't be withdrawing; it is too big and too powerful. 
But its staff here probably will shrink more, says Mr. Yassukovich, as it expands elsewhere in Europe. 
He says Europe "remains a critical area and continues to receive maximum emphasis." 

   Mr. Giles says the firm doesn't intend to pull out of any markets. 
"After a lot of soul-searching, we are still in there." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
