ID: 128	RANK: 98	SCORE: 4.989710
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870702-0004 </DOCNO>
<HL> Toshiba Corp.'s
2 Top Officers
Quit Their Posts
---
Move Follows Senate's Vote
To Punish Firm for Sale
Of Equipment to Soviets
---
By Masayoshi Kanabayashi
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> JAPAN WNEWS
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)
ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Toshiba Corp.'s top two executives resigned, taking responsibility for a unit's sale of militarily sensitive technology to the Soviet Union. 

   The unexpected announcement came amid mounting criticism in the U.S. and Japan over Toshiba Machine Co.'s sale to the Soviets of sophisticated metalworking equipment and related computer programs between 1982 and 1984. 
The Pentagon says the gear enabled Moscow to make its submarines quieter and thus harder for the U.S. to locate. 

   On Tuesday, the U.S. Senate approved, 92-5, an amendment to the pending trade bill that would impose a ban of between two and five years on imports of goods produced by Toshiba, a maker of consumer and industrial electronic products. 

   The Senate move also applies to Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk AS, a Norwegian company that sold similar equipment to the Soviets. 

   The overwhelming vote to punish Toshiba indicates that, despite administration opposition, some form of sanction against the company is likely to become law. 

   In Japan, Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone yesterday morning criticized Toshiba Machine's behavior in a strong statement, which was interpreted here as criticism of the parent company. 

   At a news conference later in the day, Sugiichiro Watari, Toshiba's 62-year-old president and chief executive officer, and Shoichi Saba, 68, Toshiba's chairman, said they were stepping aside to become advisers to the company. 
The two executives, who were named to their posts in April 1986, also resigned as directors. 

   Joichi Aoi, a 61-year-old senior executive vice president, was named president and chief executive. 
The chairman's post was left vacant. 
In Japanese companies, the president's job is usually the more powerful position. 

   Mr. Saba said he and Mr. Watari were resigning because they "feel gravely responsible for further straining Japan-U.S. relations." 
Mr. Saba also said the two executives made the decision to resign because of concern about "the consequences of Toshiba Machine's behavior for the security of the Western world." 

   The two reiterated that Toshiba Corp. had nothing directly to do with its unit's controversial sales. 
Mr. Saba added, however, that "as (head of) the parent company of the Toshiba group, I feel responsible for allowing such conditions to grow inside the corporate system." 

   Toshiba also reiterated that it will audit its unit with the participation of a U.S. third party, most likely its accountant, Price Waterhouse. 

   Hajime Tamura, who heads Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, or MITI, said that because of the resignations, "I think it will be easier for MITI to deal with the situation." 

   Sen. Jake Garn (R., Utah), one of the principal sponsors of the legislation that would shut Toshiba out of the U.S. market, wasn't moved by the resignations. 
"That's a decision for the company to make, but it doesn't alter the fact that the diversion occurred," he said. 

   However, members of the Senate staff working on the legislation believe that Toshiba could minimize its eventual punishment if that gesture were followed by stringent corporate policies to prevent such shipments from recurring. 
"Our purpose wasn't to hang any individual out to dry," said one of Mr. Garn's aides. 
"We want a change in procedures." 

   Nonetheless, political sentiment against the company is running high, reflecting both U.S. anger at the compromise of defense secrets and a broader displeasure with Japan for running a huge trade surplus while failing to contribute much to defense against the Soviet Union. 
The Toshiba case combines both feelings in a powerful way. 
Senior administration officials confide that similar feelings are shared privately in the executive branch, even though formal policy pronouncements are much calmer. 

   The ban was supported by both parties and every segment of political opinion in the Senate. 
The only significant criticism came from senators who felt the ban wasn't tough enough because it wasn't permanent and allowed the president some discretion in limiting its scope. 

   The amendment won't become law unless it is accepted by the House and the overall trade bill is signed by President Reagan, who has announced his opposition to such punitive bills. 
But the margin of approval indicates that even if the trade bill fails, the ban could be attached later to another measure. 

   Besides banning imports of goods produced by Toshiba and Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk, the amendment approved by the Senate bars the two companies from contracts with the U.S. government. 
And it would require the U.S. government to seek financial compensation from the two companies for the military damage caused by the sales. 
The measure exempts certain items and gives the president discretion to make other modifications, including ending the ban after two years. 

   MITI, meanwhile, has said it is increasing by 50% the number of officials who supervise exports to communist nations. 

   The controversy surrounding the sales already had caused the resignation of the president of Toshiba Machine, which is 50.1%-owned by Toshiba Corp. 
In addition, two Toshiba Machine executives have been arrested and the company has been banned by the Japanese government from exporting to communist countries for one year. 

   Both Toshiba and the Norwegian company also have offered to help the U.S. improve its anti-submarine warfare capability as partial compensation for the damage caused by their exports to the Soviets. 

   The Japanese offer was announced by U.S. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger after talks in Tokyo with Mr. Nakasone and Japanese Defense Minister Yukio Kurihara. 
Mr. Weinberger said Tuesday that he found the Japanese officials "very cooperative" and "very interested" in working with the U.S. to regain its position in submarine technology. 

   But none of the Japanese moves have sufficed to stem the growing criticism of the sales. 

   Toshiba shares opened on the Tokyo Stock Exchange Thursday at 670 yen ($4.56), down 10 yen (6.8 cents). 

   Analysts said that if the Senate amendment were to become law, it would be a serious blow to Toshiba. 
The company has annual U.S. sales exceeding $1 billion, according to a spokesman. 

   An analyst with a major Japanese securities house said a ban on exports to the U.S. could wipe out the entire pre-tax profit of 50 billion yen ($340 million) that he expects Toshiba to record in the year ending March 31, 1988. 

   Mr. Aoi, the new Toshiba president, declined to answer directly how the company would deal with the sanctions. 
But he said: "If it actually happens, it will be disastrous." 

   Walter S. Mossberg in Washington contributed to this article. 

   ---
   Toshiba Corp.
   Consolidated sales by business category: 

   Industrial electronics and parts .... 36% 

   Consumer Products ................... 28%
   Heavy Electrical Apparatus .......... 26% 

   Others .............................. 10%
   Consolidated Results:
   Sales ............................... $22.7 billion 

   Net income .......................... $234.1 million
   Total assets ........................ $22.5 billion 

   Notes: Figures are for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1987. 

   Toshiba has 37 consolidated subsidiaries. 

   One dollar currently equals about 146 yen. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
