ID: 125	RANK: 81	SCORE: 10.465442
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880608-0157 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Portrait of the Artist as Dirty Dog </HL>
<AUTHOR> Hilton Kramer </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   About the lives of great artists it is possible to write many different kinds of books, and not all of them will have much to tell us about art. 
In biographies of artists in whose lives the role played by sex, fame, money and politics offers every inducement to divert our attention from the tasks of art, it would be especially idle to expect much in the way of aesthetic intelligence. 
We should therefore not be shocked to discover that in a new biography of Pablo Picasso that is destined to have an immense media success -- "Picasso: Creator and Destroyer" by Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington (Simon &amp; Schuster, 558 pages, $22.95) -- all artistic matters are relegated to the sidelines. 
What Mrs. Huffington has given us in this new "Picasso" is a vividly written life of the artist as a dirty dog. 

   Picasso died in 1973 at the age of 91, and as anyone who is even minimally acquainted with the details of his long and tumultuous career already knows, evidence in support of such an odious portrait is more than ample. 
It has long been recognized, in fact, that Picasso was not a nice man. 
He was the classic example of the artist who believes himself to be above every moral scruple or humane consideration -- the type is not confined to the life of art, of course -- and he was nothing if not consistent in his impulse to destroy, insofar as it was within his power to do so, the lives of those who were closest to him. 

   For the men and women -- especially the women -- who lavished him with love, admiration and understanding, the reward was likely to be humiliation and suffering. 
Friends, wives, lovers, family, fellow artists, servants and colleagues of every sort were ruthlessly and routinely sacrificed on the altar of an egotism and a sexual appetite that in the course of time acquired a distinctly pathological character. 
And sex was by no means the only arena in which these unlovely scenarios were enacted. 
In politics, too, Picasso was the consummate opportunist and dissembler. 
Indeed, in everything but his art Picasso was in most respects the perfect villain, and not everything in his art entirely escaped the taint of his deformed personality. 

   The story of his life is not, then, a pretty one, and Mrs. Huffington, unlike some of Picasso's earlier biographers, has not attempted to conceal the worst. 
On the contrary, she positively revels in it. 
At times one needs a strong stomach to get through some of the more lurid episodes in this chronicle of horrors. 
About everything from Picasso's cruel treatment of the many women in his life to his heartless rejection of his children and his betrayal of devoted friends to his hypocritical and immoral support of Stalin, she provides many details that have not heretofore been given us. 
About Picasso's politics, certainly, Mrs. Huffington has given us a more complete account than anyone else. 

   Despite its vivid illumination of the more disreputable aspects of Picasso's life, however, Mrs. Huffington's biography suffers, unfortunately, from a failure so fundamental that it renders her book almost useless as a guide to her subject's story. 
This failure consists of her categorical inability to understand anything about art. 
On the basis of this book, one would have to conclude that the whole realm of aesthetic experience is simply closed to its author's sensibility. 
As to what a work of art is, about what goes into its creation and the ways in which, at the highest levels of achievement, it may be said to transcend the conditions of its creation, Mrs. Huffington clearly knows nothing. 

   Knowing nothing about art, she flounders horribly whenever she is called upon -- as one frequently is in writing the life of Picasso -- to deal with it. 
Thus, "Les Desmoiselles d'Avignon," the painting that inaugurated Cubism, is blithely dismissed as "a rejection of life and creation," and Picasso's many other masterworks are similarly disposed of. 
Mrs. Huffington quotes Jung's adverse judgment on Picasso's art -- "the whole thing quite pointless" -- as if it were something to be taken seriously, and indeed she misses no opportunity to quote similarly negative opinions. 
Knowing nothing about art herself, she certainly knows what she dislikes -- and Picasso's art seems to head the list. 
It hardly comes as a surprise when, at the end of this long and repulsive book, we are told that "Unlike Shakespeare and Mozart . . . 
Picasso was not a timeless genius." 
On no page of this biography are we ever given any reason to believe otherwise. 

   The truth about Picasso is that his life was governed by two overriding interests -- the aesthetic and the erotic -- and the aesthetic is accorded no place in this book. 
By devoting her biography primarily to the artist's erotic life, Mrs. Huffington has given us but half the man -- the half that most resembles the characters in "Dallas" and sundry other entertainments about people who are rich, famous and monstrous. 
This will no doubt guarantee the book's success -- first on the best-seller lists, and then, inevitably, as a television miniseries. 
But it leaves the more difficult task of writing the life of the artist still to be done. 

   ---
   Mr. Kramer is the editor of The New Criterion. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
