ID: 125	RANK: 84	SCORE: 10.384018
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880817-0156 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- The Gallery: Braque From Beginning to End </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jack Flam </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Although the French painter Georges Braque (1882-1963) is considered one of the masters of 20th-century art, he also is an artist whose reputation is in an odd way still in the making. 
Or, in certain quarters, in the unmaking. 

   Braque, who is the subject of a retrospective exhibition here at the Guggenheim Museum, occupies a unique position among modern artists. 
He was a principal participant in two very different early modernist styles, fauvism and cubism. 
And although as a fauve he was more of a gifted follower than a major innovator, he literally co-invented cubism with Pablo Picasso. 
In fact, specialists still argue about which of the two painted the first true cubist pictures around 1908 and about which one first hit upon the revolutionary technique of collage a few years later. 

   Braque's relationship to Picasso was a problematical one. 
For a few years after 1909 the two worked together so closely and toward such similar ends that even they themselves were said to be unable to tell their canvases apart. 
But after World War I, in which Picasso, a Spanish national, did not serve but in which Braque was severely wounded, their friendship ended. 
Picasso, with his characteristic and often cruel egotism, played down Braque's role in their joint ventures. (At one point, in a heady mixture of arrogance and misogyny, he dismissed Braque as "my wife.") 
And as Picasso became an increasingly public man and grew to be the most famous artist of the century, the reclusive Braque tended to recede into the shadows. 

   This is not to say that Braque was ignored. 
Far from it. 
Throughout his life he was held in high esteem by artists and critics alike, and when he died he was given the singular honor of a state funeral at the Louvre. 
But during the past 25 years his former comrade's reputation has tended to eclipse his own. 
His work has not had nearly the exposure that Picasso's has, and some critics have even come to question his greatness, feeling that he merely had the good luck of being able to ride along in Picasso's wake. 
The Guggenheim Museum exhibition is the first American museum show since 1949 to deal with Braque's work from beginning to end. 

   The show begins on the fourth-floor ramp of this spiraling space and ends on the sixth. 
So you work your way up it and then see it again in reverse as you leave. 
Whether intended or not, this arrangement is a good one, as it induces you to begin and end with the earlier works -- which to my mind are the most interesting. 

   Like many artists of his generation, Braque started out working in a naturalistic style, as can be seen in an early portrait of his grandmother (1900-02) and in a 1905 view of a church square at the French Channel port of Honfleur. 
It was not until 1906 that Braque, following Matisse and Derain, began to paint in the bright colors characteristic of fauvism. 
This show includes a number of his important and impressive fauve canvases, including one of his rare figure studies from this period, the predominantly red, green and violet "Seated Nude" of 1907. 

   The following year, under the influence of Cezanne, Braque began to fracture his forms and emphasize the interaction of objects and background. 
With a relatively small number of well-chosen works, the exhibition gives a good idea of the development of Braque's cubism. 
One thing that emerges is that until around 1910 Braque, like Picasso, found it difficult to "destroy" the objects in his paintings. 
In paintings such as the famous "Harbor at Normandy" of 1909 and "Violin and Palette" of 1909-10 the objects are fragmented and fractured as if made of cut glass, but they remain clearly recognizable. 

   After 1910, Braque's palette became more restrained but his probing of the abstract possibilities of painting became more intense. 
Although his 1911-12 paintings tend to be somewhat more lyrical than Picasso's, and more gently painted, they are equally austere. 
Somewhere in the monochrome labyrinth of lines and planes and choppy brush strokes we recognize that there is a subject, but it is not always easy to make out where the subject is, or where its component parts might be. 
Among the most majestic of the cubist paintings in this show is "Rooftops at Ceret" of 1911, in which the angular rooftops and chimneys of the Catalan town are translated into a kind of speculative, metaphysical geometry. 

   After World War I, Braque continued to work in a cubist idiom, but it became an increasingly literal and realistic one, despite the intense frontality of the forms and flattening of space. 
It is here I think we see the greatest difference between his and Picasso's methods. 
Whereas Picasso in his later works seemed to extend the cubist vocabulary by somehow getting inside his forms and twisting and exploding them from within, Braque seems to have applied cubist formulas of fragmentation to an essentially realistic vision. 
As a result there is a cool, somewhat intellectual quality in the later works that tends to evoke admiration rather than enthusiasm. 
Though there are some very beautiful paintings here from the later years, there is more than a touch of what might be called academic cubism in many of the others. 
This may be the result less of Braque than of the limited choice of his works available to the Guggenheim for the show. 

   It is not until the very end of the show, in a series of thickly painted landscapes inspired by Van Gogh, that you sense again the electricity present in Braque's cubist works. 
It is around this point that you also begin to retrace your steps and have the pleasure of ending up where both you and Braque began, at the time when he was reformulating the pictorial language of 20th-century painting. 

   Back on the fourth floor, you will be invited to exit on foot via the exhibition called "Modern Treasures From the National Gallery in Prague." 
By all means do so. 
For although this is a mixed bag, with more Czechoslovakian painting than you might want to see at one time, there also are a number of masterpieces that would be worth a trip all the way to Prague. 
These include Munch's haunting "Dance on the Shore," a magnificent Cezanne portrait, six first-rate Picassos (including the famous 1907 self-portrait), Derain's celebrated proto-cubist "View of Cadaques," a 1921 Braque still-life as good as any in the Braque show, and a roomful of impressive abstract paintings by Frantisek Kupka, the best of the Czech modernists. 

   Moreover, virtually all of these paintings seem to be unvarnished, unrelined and unrestored -- that is, almost as fresh as the day they were painted. 

   The Braque show was sponsored by the National Endowment for the Arts. 
Both exhibitions are accompanied by well-produced catalogs with all works illustrated in color, and both will be on view until Sept. 11. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
