ID: 163	RANK: 39	SCORE: 11.814965
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861224-0162 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
A Christmas Present</HL>
<DD> 12/24/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AIRLINES (AIR)
AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Charles Lindbergh's historic words were, "I made it." 
Neil Armstrong uttered the neatly crafted "one small step" lines. 
Dick Rutan, at touchdown yesterday after his and Jeana Yeager's nine-day, nonstop, non-refueled circumnavigation of the globe, simply said, "Miller time." 

   Those words are a part of America's popular culture. 
So are individualistic feats of daring and creative enterprise. 
Being reminded of that after enduring several weeks of nonstop and often self-demeaning acrimony from the nation's capital is the nicest Christmas present we can imagine. 

   The admen who compose beer commercials usually are in closer touch with our culture than more elevated thinkers. 
Creative and constructive work well done earns a time to relax. 
When Voyager alighted on the California desert after an incredible feat of aircraft design and human endurance, we, at least, needed no further refreshment. 

   "Not bad for three people, eh?" asked Dick Rutan pointedly when a congressman thrust himself forward to welcome the fliers back. 
The congressman, whose name we didn't catch, obviously meant well but seemed out of place in that bright Mojave desert world of Burt Rutan, who had designed and built a beautiful and unique airplane, and of Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager, who had just flown it around the world. 

   A reporter wanted to know why the Rutans and Ms. Yeager undertook this adventure. 
The answer, which demands reflection, was that they were sure it could be done and wanted to experience "the event," the accomplishment of something never before achieved. 
Lindbergh would have understood. 
So would any artist who ever found self-expression in putting paint on canvas or musical notes on a staff. 

   Burt Rutan's artistry is airplanes. 
Someone has called him an "aerospace hacker," a term of high praise that equates him with computer hackers and all the other tinkerers whose imaginations have yielded up our modern inventions. 
Rutan planes are things of beauty -- lightweight creations using Hexcel fiber-reinforced composites and honeycomb for strength plus little "canard" wings up front for extra lift and stability. 
His speciality is putting together experimental, one-of-a-kind, small-scale prototypes to test out new designs for builders of private and military aircraft. 
The Voyager, with its incredible capacity to lift 9.5 times its own weight (which enabled it to carry enough fuel for its global flight), was the ultimate expression of his art. 
A fuel-efficient, liquid-cooled Continental engine and a new long-lasting synthetic motor oil from Mobil contributed to the 'round-the-world feat. 

   Burt Rutan has not escaped America's constraints on enterprise. 
He at one time marketed $100 and $200 instruction kits for would-be builders of home-made airplanes. 
As with so many small-business men these days, he ran into the liability crisis. 
A customer neglected a few steps, particularly the use of bolts as well as glue to hold the wings on his craft. 
He crashed and sued. 
Mr. Rutan won his case, but spent $10,000 in legal fees, an experience that persuaded him to move into non-retail endeavors. 

   There is irony in the fact that someone thought it necessary to put a counter on the Voyager landing gear to be checked by a National Aeronautic Association official after the landing, so there could never be any suspicion that Dick and Jeana stopped somewhere for refueling during their flight. 
The NAA, a private group that certifies aircraft competitions and record-setting flights, was only doing its job, but we never entirely escape the lawyer culture. 

   We escaped it sufficiently, however. 
Dick Rutan in his cowboy hat and Jeana Yeager in her flight suit, perched on top of Voyager to stretch their legs after 25,012 bumpy and at times harrowing miles, were symbols of that escape yesterday. 
Their safe return brings us a full measure of Christmas joy. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
