ID: 163	RANK: 70	SCORE: 10.100523
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861224-0013 </DOCNO>
<HL> Firms Involved in Voyager Global Flight
Expect to Cash In on Plane's Technology
---
By Eileen White
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/24/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> RTN HXL HPC MOB ALD
AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN>
<DATELINE> EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    As the Voyager aircraft
made a near-perfect touchdown here yesterday after its
nonstop flight around the globe, companies involved in the
plane's development started looking ahead to commercial
applications of the technologies that made the record-setting
flight possible.
   Pilot Richard Rutan, 48 years old, and copilot Jeana Yeager, 34, flew 25,012 miles in nine days without stopping or refueling. 
The trip was completed about one day ahead of schedule because of favorable winds. 

   The aircraft averaged 115.8 miles per hour, which Voyager officials compared to the speed of Charles Lindbergh's first transatlantic flight. 
The feat was accomplished largely because of Voyager's glider-like design, its construction of honeycomb-like composite materials made of a type of plastic and wood fiber, and a lightweight, long-range engine. 

   The two pilots, who shared a cramped phone-booth-sized cabin for 216 hours and four minutes, were bruised and a bit wobbly on leaving the Voyager, having been bounced around by fierce storms along their flight path. 

   Worries about lack of enough fuel proved to be wrong, but the crew had a heart-stopping moment early yesterday morning when they accidentally cut off the plane's rear engine for five minutes while transferring from one fuel source to another, causing the Voyager to drop 3,400 feet before power was restored. 

   Mr. Rutan, who stayed at the controls during 80% of the flight, emerged gingerly from the cockpit shortly after 8 a.m. PST and was handed his signature 10-gallon cowboy hat. 
Speaking of the tough, five-year private effort to get the Voyager built, he said, "The American people can still do something that corporations and government can't." 

   The plane's unusual shape and structure have been regarded with skepticism in the aerospace industry. 
The composite structure is made up of paper core honeycomb covered by high-technology plastics and glass fibers, which are held together by epoxy. 
This produces a frame that is very strong and ultra-lightweight -- unlike metal. 
The Voyager weighs 1,858 pounds empty. 

   Composites are commonly used in unmanned military aircraft and increasingly are being used in fighter planes. 
The advanced tactical fighter being developed by the Air Force for the 1990s will have a frame made largely of composites. 
But composites only recently have been used in commercial aircraft. 
For example, Boeing Co. currently uses composite parts along with its metal airframe in its 757 and 767 aircraft. 

   Burt Rutan, the plane's designer and the brother of its pilot, surveyed the returned aircraft and said the flight proved that the design is viable. 
Asked if the flight's success also proved his theory that aircraft can be made completely of composites, Mr. Rutan grinned and said, "It can't hurt." 

   In fact, Mr. Rutan already has designed an eight-passenger business aircraft with a shape similar to Voyager which features small forward wings for maximum lift and flexible rear wings almost as long as those of a Boeing 727 jetliner. 
The plane, which will be the first business aircraft made completely of composites, is being developed by Raytheon Co.'s Beech Aircraft unit under the name Starship. 

   Mr. Rutan also is designing two additional light planes for Beech that will be similar to Voyager. 
"Voyager's flight will go a long way toward popularizing composites in general aviation," said William Graham, a Beech spokesman. 

   Hexcel Inc. and Hercules Inc., the chemical companies that provided plastic-based composites for Voyager and helped build the plane, also are hoping the successful flight will encourage aircraft builders to use more composite components. 

   "This proves that it's a reliable material," said H.A. Schowengerdt, president of the Aerospace unit of Wilmington, Del.-based Hercules. 

   The experimental plane didn't survive completely unscathed. 
On takeoff, the vertical winglet at the tip of the right wing dragged on the ground and was badly damaged. 
By the time the plane landed, about two feet of the composite skin had peeled off the right wing and was dangling. 

   Voyager's crew also had some minor difficulties with the plane's Teledyne Inc. long-distance engine, an adaptation of an engine used in unmanned military reconnaisance planes. 
Besides the five-minute stall, the engine overheated once when the co-pilots forgot to check oil pressure for a day and a half. 
But Teledyne already has begun marketing similar engines under the name Voyager. 

   Other companies that donated products to the Voyager project are planning similar marketing strategies. 
Mobil Corp. plans to make use of its ties to the project in marketing a special synthetic engine lubricant it developed for the plane. 
King Radio, a unit of Allied-Signal Inc., is planning to rely heavily on its Voyager connection in selling a satellite-based aircraft navigation system that was successfully tested on Voyager. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
