ID: 213	RANK: 73	SCORE: 11.710097
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861222-0202 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
Cybill Makes It Work
---
By George V. Higgins</HL>
<DD> 12/22/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Here are three observations as the year winds down. 
The first concerns Cybill Shepherd, who debuted in ABC's "Moonlighting," filling out a resume already impressively listing 10 motion pictures (including "The Last Picture Show" and "Taxi Driver") three stints on stage ("Picnic"), three record albums ("Cybill Does It to Cole Porter"), and a part in that yawner of a TV miniseries reconstituted from "The Long Hot Summer." 
Ms. Shepherd at 36 is clearly not a lady who enjoys idleness. 

   The premise of "Moonlighting" initially made me suspect that her laudable industrious tendencies had gotten the better of her judgment. 
To wrench her (as Maddie Hayes) into harness with Bruce Willis (as David Addison) as the inadvertent partner in the Blue Moon Detective Agency, the show's creators severely tested credulity by making her a top-gun model bilked by her thieving manager into, among other unpleasantness, a tax-write-off co-ownership of the ill-managed business. 
When the manager's embezzlements finally beggared her, she had no alternative but to become an active partner in the floundering enterprise. 
That is the sort of story line that comes out of spitballing sessions on sunny afternoons in the cabanas with the phones around the pool at the Beverly Hills Hotel. 

   Some writers and producers who have never done much except write and produce -- and therefore have no notion whatsoever how real business is transacted -- get giddy on Perrier and salads containing raisins, and the next thing you know, they've sold "a vehicle" to a programming executive. 
Thespians such as Ms. Shepherd are vulnerable to such opportunities because work seems preferable to professional languor. 
If there is nothing brilliant to do at the moment, they (Klaus Maria Brandauer and "Streets of Gold" springs to mind, followed closely by Robert De Niro and "The Mission") do something lesser, or loaf. 
When they do the inferior stuff, those of us with steady jobs lambaste them for selling out. 
This refreshes us, but does not address the problem of what performers are to do when there's nothing much to do. 

   What Ms. Shepherd and Mr. Willis, now in their second year of operating their rather flimsy vehicle, appear to have done is substitute their synergistic chemistries for the feeble source of energy provided by the originators of the program. 

   Last Tuesday night's offering was another one of those boldly bogus, Dickens-Capra ripoffs so common this time of the year, but Ms. Shepherd carried it off rather well. 
Some five minutes into the show, we all know what's going to happen: It's Christmas, and one of the main characters impulsively puts a full crank on the greed knob. 
This makes all peripherals miserable, and promises to ruin their lives. 
The Scrooge stand-in then repairs alone to a place where an angel stops by and takes him firmly in hand. 
There ensues a tour of past, present and future, during which the stand-in learns the meaning of remorse and the hazards of saying "Humbug." 
Luckily for the stand-in, all the angels, all the ghosts, have the capabilities of the newest VCRs -- fast forward, freeze frame and rewind. 
So after the stand-in has the bejabbers scared out of him, it still isn't Christmas yet, and a chance for repentance exists. 
Scrooge stand-in repents, and all weep salt tears -- yes, Christmas really is here. 

   It's all hogwash, of course. 
It is very hard for a rational adult to watch Maddie slugging down the clear drinks with the olives in them, getting picked up in a bar by a guy who looks like a British publisher, and taking off with him in her BMW 635CSi, without at once concluding that the people in charge of the script have serious problems with reality. 
Artistic integrity would have required that Maddie, having fought with her partner/suitor, old David, would snuggle up to a sleaze bag who'd give her a disease. 
But, no: He's an angel, just like the one in "It's a Wonderful Life," only this time colorized from the start. 
He's not interested in glomming her lingerie; he wants her to reform her life. 

   Anyone who believes that saturnine, bearded gentlemen hit on gorgeous blondes in bars in order to lead them to salvation, has eggnog for brains. 
This is another way of backing in to the judgment that Ms. Shepherd is a very talented actress. 
She took that wheyfaced script and actually made it play. 
Kudos to the lady; she's what explains the ratings. 

   The other observations: The time has come for TV football announcers to start telling the truth from time to time about steroids and cement. 
This NFL season should have been compressed into several episodes of "St. 
Elsewhere," with Howie Mandel and Ed Begley Jr. doing arthroscopic surgery on all the players who've been badly hurt. 
It is not natural for human males, 76 inches tall, to weigh 290 pounds and have no necks. 
It is not healthful for 220-pound human males to collide with each other at flank speed on concrete padded with nylon bristles, at 20 degrees Fahrenheit. 
If we are going to watch this carnage, and we are, the people describing it should have the same reportorial decency displayed by commentators at the Indianapolis 500, the Darlington 500 and the Grand Prix of Monte Carlo -- say what caused the casualty, in no uncertain terms. 

   Saturday at 10 p.m. HBO airs "Barbra Streisand: One Voice." 
Ms. Streisand charged her Hollywood pals five deductible Ks each to hear her sing at her California home. 
The proceeds went to the Barbra Streisand Foundation, which, among many other things, intends to promote civil liberties. 
Watch as Barbra extolls FDR as a champion of such desiderata, omitting the facts that FDR colluded if he did not connive in Earl Warren's World War II unconstitutional internment of California Nisei, furtively taped the conversations in his Oval Office, and deliberately misled Congress about the extent of America's pre-1941 involvement in the war. 
Splendid stuff -- Jane Fonda'd better watch out. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
