ID: 292	RANK: 32	SCORE: 18.909893
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870723-0038 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

By Cynthia Mitchell
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> KMB
FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)
PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Forty minutes into the hit movie "Raising Arizona," protagonist Herbert McDunnough races down a grocery-store aisle, dodging a spray of bullets, in search of diapers for a baby he kidnapped. 
He tears past Pampers and Luvs and snatches a sack of Huggies-brand disposable diapers. 

   So far, some five million Americans have viewed the scene in which Kimberly-Clark Corp.'s Huggies triumph over the competing brands. 
Priceless publicity -- and it was free. 
The film's writer and producer, Ethan Cohen, says he chose Huggies because the name "sounded funnier than any other brand name." 

   Go ahead and laugh, says Kimberly-Clark -- as long as Huggies keep disappearing from the store shelves. 
Today, three out of 10 disposable diapers sold in America are Huggies. 
Kimberly-Clark's success in the highly profitable, ultracompetitive diaper business has amazed people in the consumer-product industry. 
Huggies have dealt a blow to competitor Pampers and their maker, Procter &amp; Gamble, which in fiscal 1985 reported its first operating earnings decline in 33 years; the drop was due partly to its so-called diaper wars with Kimberly-Clark. 

   And the triumph clinched Kimberly-Clark's evolution from a staid paper company to a plucky consumer-product competitor, selling such durable name brands as Kleenex and Kotex and such successful newcomers as Lightdays panty liners. 
In 1970, Kimberly-Clark was a lumbering manufacturing company with the headquarters in poky Neenah, Wis. 
Today, it has shiny offices in Neenah, Dallas and Atlanta, with squadrons of marketing executives and million-dollar research and development labs, where babies crawl about with temperature and humidity sensors trailing from their tails. 
Last year, consumer products accounted for 78% of the company's $4.3 billion in sales and 70% of its operating profit. 

   "People don't smile anymore when they hear Neenah, Wis.," says Jerry DellaFemina, the chairman of DellaFemina, Travisano &amp; Partners, a big New York ad agency, which has never handled a Kimberly-Clark account. 
"It used to be, 'God, they're behind the times. 
The big guys {in consumer products} will come in and clean their clocks.'" 

   Kimberly-Clark's goal in the 1970s and 1980s, to soften the wild swings of the commodities business by diversifying, was a common one in American industry and yet uncommonly tricky. 
Many corporations failed in similar attempts. 

   Kimberly-Clark succeeded with a slow and careful diversification into the fiercely competitive consumer-product industry. 
It focused on products linked to its core industry. 
Much of the filling inside a Huggies diaper, for example, comes from a Kimberly-Clark pulp mill in Coosa Pines, Ala. 
The linings are produced in plants in North Carolina, Mississippi and Wisconsin. 

   Added to that was the company's doggedness, even when a product faltered, and its trailblazing use of media. 
Television ads for Kimberly-Clark's Kotex sanitary napkins in the 1970s ended the taboo on advertising feminine products. 
The company hopes to duplicate its success with its advertising of Depend undergarments for incontinent adults. 
Its flops, which include a germ-killing facial tissue that consumers sneezed at, not into, have been relatively few. 

   The transformation of Kimberly-Clark is largely the work of Darwin E. Smith, the amiable, 61-year-old chairman since 1971. 
When Mr. Smith took control of the company, management was gliding along on past successes. 
Kimberly-Clark was a major supplier of newsprint to such companies as New York Times Inc. 
Its Kleenex brand controlled one-third of the market for facial tissues, and Kotex had more than half of the sanitary-napkin market, which it pioneered in 1920. 

   Mr. Smith decided that future growth could come only from new businesses, and he began a restructuring program that shook the company's very foundations. 
He closed four large mills that produced coated paper, which was not always profitable, and laid off 3,000 workers in the process. 
He sold the paper mill that Kimberly-Clark's founders had opened in the 1880s, 323,000 acres of prime timberland and two sawmills in Northern California. 
"We were striking at some very deep-running traditions," says Mr. Smith. 

   The various divestments saved the company money and earned it more than $250 million in cash, which Mr. Smith used as a diversification war chest. 

   The battle Mr. Smith envisioned was with Procter &amp; Gamble, the king of consumer-products. 
He used his war chest to raid the marketing and research staffs of his competitors, to beef up the company's research and development efforts, and to spend on extensive advertising. 
In 1980, he supplemented Neenah with a 98-acre operating headquarters north of Atlanta, increasing the company's ability to recruit white-collar staff. 

   The arena in which Mr. Smith decided to fight Procter &amp; Gamble was disposable diapers. 
The market was relatively new -- the first disposable diapers were introduced in the early 1960s -- enormous and, with a new baby boom beginning, poised to explode. (Current studies show that each child under the age of two goes through 2,300 diapers a year, which makes a market of $3 billion in the United States alone.) 

   Kimberly-Clark had already achieved some success in the diaper business, but it was short-lived. 
In 1968, the company introduced a disposable diaper designed to compete with Pampers. 
Called Kimbies, the diapers within a year snared 20% of the market in each city in which they were introduced. 
But management rested on its laurels. 
It shifted its focus away from keeping Kimbies as the market's innovation leader -- the very aspect that had enabled the brand to so quickly snag Pampers' market share -- and sales declined. 
By the mid-1970s, many of the company's executives had concluded the brand was a failure. 
They recommended the company withdraw from the business. 

   Mr. Smith rejected the idea. 
He felt disposable diapers were the embodiment of Kimberly-Clark's strengths: its expertise in paper and its growing marketing flair. 
In 1978, he brought out Huggies -- virtually the same diapers as Kimbies but with a new hourglass shape, a new, more absorbent filling, a fresh name and extensive marketing support. 
The brand took off and now accounts for 26% of the company's sales. 
Recently, it replaced Kleenex as the flagship brand of the company. 

   Turning the corner into consumer products was tricky, and a key element of Mr. Smith's strategy was blending the old operations with the new. 
Kimberly-Clark's profit margins on diapers and other paper-based products are generally higher than its competitors, thanks to the integration of the two sides of the business. 

   For this reason, Mr. Smith makes sure the paper-product managers and workers don't feel inferior to their counterparts at the more glamorous marketing divisions. 

   "It's a fine, fine line you've got to walk," says Mr. Smith, a down-to-earth executive who tours plants in blue jeans and running shoes. 
When he visits the huge Coosa Pines, Ala., pulp mill, he reminds workers there would be no diaper sales without the efficient production of fluff pulp, the diapers' absorbent. 
The theme recurs in the four "fireside chats" he has videotaped for the company's 19,000 domestic employees this year. (Kimberly-Clark spends large sums modernizing its football-field-length paper machines, having spent $150 million on the Coosa Pines mill alone in the past five years.) 

   After a few near-tumbles, the company has learned to be vigilant with its marketing successes. 
In the late 1970s, sales of Kleenex tissues stagnated, and the brand was having trouble maintaining a third of the market. 
Research showed that consumers preferred competing brands because they were softer. (In fact, the company had gradually increased the level of recycled wood pulp in the tissues to about 50%, which made them cheaper to produce but cardboard-like.) 

   "It's kind of like horsefeed. 
You can keep stretching it with sawdust and it doesn't seem like the horse cares," says James D. Bernd, the president of the company's household-products sector. 
"Then one day, you look up and the horse is dead." 
The company gave Kleenex back its soft texture, and market share quickly jumped. 
Last year, an even softer Kleenex was introduced, incorporating expensive eucalyptus pulp. 
Kleenex now commands about half the market. 

   By early 1986, Kimberly-Clark's resilience was being tested again. 
P&amp;G had beaten the company to the market with an extra-thin diaper called "Ultra Pampers." 
Kimberly-Clark possessed the necessary technology -- super-absorbent polymers which replaced some of the bulky fluff -- and was even using it in its adult incontinence products. 
But the company delayed its plans for thin baby diapers when research showed that parents didn't think diapers were absorbent unless they doubled the size of baby's bottom. 

   The research was wrong, and Huggies' market share dropped sharply. 
The company hustled to put a thin diaper on the market -- it took six months to retool its old machines -- and Huggies regained their one-third market share, which had fallen to 25% in 1986. 

   One of the most intriguing new products invented by Kimberly-Clark was a germ-killing tissue, nicknamed Killer Kleenex by company employees and marketed under the name Avert. 
The product was an impressive blend of the old and the new. 
In 1980, company scientists discovered that disposable tissues treated with citric acid actually stopped the spread of germs. 
The tissue was tested in an experiment undertaken at the University of Wisconsin, during which poker-playing students were given germ-killing tissues to wipe their hands and noses. 
They managed to avoid catching colds from the sneezing, sniffling card player planted in each game. 
Kimberly-Clark began marketing Avert tissues in 1985. 

   But the product had two serious drawbacks: Avert's selling price per tissue was roughly four times that of regular Kleenex. 
And in practice, the tissues were good at preventing the spread of colds when used by a sick person. 
But they were no protection for a consumer who bought the tissues to avoid catching a cold. 

   "Intellectually, it's a good idea," Mr. Bernd says. 
"But the consumer said, 'No way. 
I'm not going to pay that price for something I have to use so my friend doesn't get my cold.'" 

   To try to salvage the product, Kimberly-Clark is attempting to sell Avert to institutions like schools, hospitals and offices, where the higher price might pay off through reduced levels of illness and absenteeism. 
The company has also cut the price in half. 

   The next test for Kimberly-Clark is maintaining its 50% stake in the market for adult incontinence products, which some analysts say will grow to $500 million by 1991 from its present $150 million. 
Kimberly-Clark's dominance is largely the result of its aggressive television advertising campaign, which the company launched when it introduced the product in 1980. 
For the past two years, actress June Allison has appeared on television ads for Depend adult incontinence products, frankly confronting viewers with the problem. 
Competing brands have only recently begun TV advertising. 

   Getting the advertisements on network television was a feat. 
Only recently did two of the three networks allow advertisements for adult incontinence products during prime time, after heavy lobbying by Kimberly-Clark. (NBC still restricts the ads to daytime or after 9 p.m.) 

   The company's success with a sensitive product like Depend mirrors its earlier efforts to strip the brown wrapping from sanitary napkins. 
"They're almost Oriental in their attitude toward marketing," says Mr. DellaFemina, whose agency is renowned for creating tasteful advertisements for condoms. 
"They're so patient. 
They'll figure a way to prevail, and sooner or later they win." 

   Analysts of the consumer-product industry say Kimberly-Clark has embarked on some new projects that bear watching. 
In 1984, it acquired Spenco Medical Corp., a Waco, Texas, maker of sports and healthcare products, including aerobic weights and dressings for wounds. 
The move was a departure for Kimberly-Clark: For the first time, it is producing goods that don't contain any fibers produced at its own factories. 
But many of the products do feed off Kimberly-Clark's extensive research in chemically based fibers. 

   The company has a few minor problems, including labor difficulties and currency troubles in Mexico, where it has a minority-owned factory. 
And in a Dallas federal court, the company is squaring off against its nemesis, Procter &amp; Gamble, which alleges that Kimberly-Clark has unlawfully used P&amp;G's method of elasticizing its diaper waistbands. 
Kimberly-Clark has countersued, claiming P&amp;G is illegally trying to monopolize the diaper market. (Analysts dismiss the suit as another salvo in the "diaper wars" and say the company could quickly figure out a new way to elasticize its diapers if it loses.) 

   More interesting is the question of who will succeed Mr. Smith when he retires in four years. 
But while analysts and Kimberly-Clark watchers say it will be an interesting battle -- they each tick off two to four potential successors -- they don't fear a new chief will steer Kimberly-Clark off its present course. 

   "It's a very substantive company; one man doesn't run the whole thing," says Bruce Kirk, a consumer-product analyst with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. 
"I don't look for any cataclysmic, wrenching kind of changes. 
I put my money on evolution, not revolution." 

   ---

               Kimberly-Clark's Changing Markets
                               Profit in millions of dollars
                                     1980          1986
  Aircraft services/
    miscellaneous                    $2.0          $9.0
  Paper products                   $110.7        $144.9
  Consumer products                $144.3        $362.6
  Total                            $257.0        $516.5

</TEXT>
</DOC>
