ID: 292	RANK: 44	SCORE: 17.463577
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910305-0161
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910305-0161.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Stodgy No More:
   At Procter &amp; Gamble,
   Change Under Artzt
   Isn't Just Cosmetic
   ---
   New CEO Pursues Revlon
   In Strategy to Focus
   On Global Growth Brands
   ---
   Clearing Out the Deadwood
   ----
   By Alecia Swasy
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/05/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1
</SO>
<CO>
   REV PG
</CO>
<IN>
COSMETICS, PERSONAL CARE, OVER-THE-COUNTER REMEDIES (COS)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)
BIOGRAPHY (BIO)
</IN>
<LP>
   Just after New Year's day, investment bankers for Revlon
Inc. Chairman Ronald O. Perelman began quietly looking for
someone to buy the glitzy cosmetics company. Within days,
Procter &amp; Gamble Co. came calling. Just a month later, P&amp;G's
relatively new chairman, Edwin Artzt, was meeting personally
with Mr. Perelman, and P&amp;G now appears the front-runner in an
international competition for Revlon.
   This hardly seems like the stodgy soap maker of
Cincinnati. But P&amp;G's aggressive interest in Revlon is just
the latest move by Mr. Artzt to put his own stamp on the
formal, slow-moving company.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   In fact, Mr. Artzt has been on the warpath since he was
named to P&amp;G's top spot. He has told managers of faltering
brands, like Citrus Hill orange juice, to get results or
he'll sell the business. He has cut spending for once-sacred
projects, like the fat substitute olestra, to focus on
best-sellers like superconcentrated Tide detergent and Pert
Plus shampoo. And he is clearing out managers who don't
perform.
   "I certainly don't want to have a short trigger with
people and not give them a chance," he says. "But sure I've
cleared out deadwood. Probably some of it was still breathing
when it was cleared out."
   P&amp;G wasn't doing all that badly before Mr. Artzt took the
helm. In fact, when the low-key John G. Smale stepped down in
late 1989 after an 18% profit surge that fiscal year, Mr.
Artzt was thought by many to be only a caretaker replacement.
   But Mr. Artzt is confronting a maturing market for many of
the company's staple products, such as diapers and
detergents, while at the same time P&amp;G's competitors have
become more aggressive.
   In response, Mr. Artzt wants to turn P&amp;G into more of a
fast-moving global marketer, particularly in high-growth
areas such as cosmetics and health-care products.
   The global race explains in part Mr. Artzt's urgency in
seeking at least parts of Revlon, whose products include Max
Factor lipstick and Halston perfume, and which is known for
its international marketing and distribution operation.
   Some competitors in the broad personal-care market, such
as the Dutch Unilever Group and Kao Corp. of Japan, have been
expanding into international markets at a much faster rate
than P&amp;G. Unilever, for example, spent $3 billion to acquire
55 businesses in 1989 alone. The Dutch company, which had
1990 sales of $39.6 billion, operates in more than 75
countries, while P&amp;G is in 46. P&amp;G has been on the move,
though; a decade ago, it had operations in just 22 countries.
   Other companies -- Unilever, Kao and France's L'Oreal S.A.
-- also have expressed interest in all or parts of Revlon.
But thus far, P&amp;G has shown the most interest, sending teams
to study Revlon businesses in Germany, Brazil, Spain and
Japan.
   P&amp;G got into the cosmetics business two years ago with the
purchase of Noxell and its Cover Girl and Clarion brands,
and, according to Mr. Artzt, it likes what it has seen. "I
don't know of any place that's not a good beauty-care
market," he says.
   "Maybe not the Middle East," he adds. "I haven't peeked
under those veils."
   The eldest son of musicians, the 60-year-old Mr. Artzt won
a basketball scholarship to the University of Oregon, where
he studied journalism. After working as a sportswriter and a
theater critic in Hollywood, he answered a newspaper ad for a
P&amp;G sales job.
   At the company's Cincinnati headquarters, he soon earned
the nickname "Prince of Darkness" because he spent so many
nights at work. "We swore he slept upside down in his office
hanging by his toes," says Lee Wotherspoon, who worked as a
brand manager with Mr. Artzt.
   He recalls how Mr. Artzt would descend the corporate
elevators at 10 p.m., only to return to his office for more
files. "He has an insatiable appetite for work," says Mr.
Wotherspoon, now a career consultant in Newton, N.H.
   It was work thousands of miles from Cincinnati that
eventually won Mr. Artzt the CEO post. He is credited with
reviving P&amp;G's struggling overseas operations, from which the
company will soon be deriving more than half of its sales. In
Japan, for example, he turned a money-losing operation into a
big profit center by tailoring diapers and detergents to
local tastes.
   Still, his appointment as chief executive surprised many
associates, who'd expected the company's president, John E.
Pepper, to be chosen. Mr. Artzt took over a company whose
revenue of $24 billion last year was double that of a decade
earlier. Net income for the fiscal year ended June 30 rose
33%, to $1.6 billion.
   But that hasn't stopped Mr. Artzt from shaking things up.
One of his first targets: the food and beverage division,
where Fisher Nut, Citrus Hill and Crisco shortening have
stalled. For instance, sales of shortening have tumbled
steeply since the mid-1980s, as consumers have reduced their
fat intake, while Citrus Hill remains a lagging third behind
Minute Maid and Tropicana orange juice.
   "When he gets numbers he doesn't like, he'll be stalking
the floors to find the people who produced them," says one
manager, who notes that Mr. Artzt is a frequent visitor these
days to the food and beverage division. "If you see Ed coming
down the hall, look out."
   In a business review last year, Mr. Artzt didn't mince
words about his disdain for a faltering nut business acquired
by his predecessor. "Can I get my money back?" he asked.
   Mr. Artzt describes his management style as "helpful and
supportive." On a Harvard recruiting trip, he singled out a
P&amp;G intern, recalling in detail her summer projects.
Nevertheless, he sometimes yells and curses when he is angry.
   That hands-on approach unnerves some subordinates, but
what challenges them the most is his demand for speed. As
international chief, Mr. Artzt pushed for quick expansion of
P&amp;G's Always sanitary napkins. Within 31 months, the product
was in 31 countries. Now it's the No. 1 or No. 2 brand in
major markets, giving P&amp;G about 12% of the $8 billion global
market.
   Today, product launches that once took years may take only
months. Being quick is essential now that smaller competitors
like Kimberly-Clark Corp. are moving faster. P&amp;G's launch of
ultra-thin diapers in the mid-1980s was supposed to give it a
three- to five-year lead time, but Kimberly-Clark caught up
within months.
   "Historically, Procter was very patient and would take a
long time to make a business work," says Gary Stibel of New
England Consulting Group. It spent two decades researching
olestra before seeking government approval. "Artzt is
collapsing the P&amp;G time frame," he says.
   Lately, P&amp;G has felt recession pressures as U.S. consumers
limit purchases of its premium-priced products. While some
overseas markets are growing faster than expected, in the
U.S. "many consumer-product markets are off a percentage
point or two," Mr. Artzt acknowledges. He has been closely
reviewing the spending plans of every business segment and
trimming some budgets. "We have to sharpen our priorities"
for capital spending, he says.
   A clear priority is building what he calls "world brands."
He points to Pert Plus, a combination shampoo-conditioner
that's now the world's best-selling brand. Launched first in
the U.S., Pert Plus is being rolled out quickly around the
globe, although often under different labels. It's sold as
Vidal Sassoon in Britain, for example, and Rejoy in Japan.
"We'll definitely have more of our brands become world
brands," Mr. Artzt says.
   That's part of the reason P&amp;G is trying to expand in the
beauty-care business, where there is strong demand in Japan
and Europe and big potential elsewhere. P&amp;G also needs
cosmetics to freshen its product mix, since some of its
items, like Duncan Hines cake mixes and Crisco shortening,
are stale. "Nobody makes two-layer cakes or deep fries
chicken anymore," says a former P&amp;G staffer.
   For P&amp;G, which typically perfects products in the lab for
years before doing painstaking market research, cosmetics is
still foreign territory. This is a business where packaging
often counts more than product quality, and advertising
slogans promise "pure, raw sensuality," not "pure white"
laundry.
   But cosmetics companies increasingly are emphasizing skin
protection and other health concerns, not just appearance.
"That starts to come right down our alley," says Mr. Artzt.
   P&amp;G plans to use its enormous research and development
base to launch new products for the Noxell cosmetic business.
The company has long been famous for gaining market
leadership by introducing products that offer an innovation,
such as Tide with bleach.
   At Noxell, it's also been cutting distribution costs while
expanding markets for Cover Girl, Navy perfume and other
brands. And it has streamlined its traditionally cumbersome
marketing methods. "If they want to change five or six makeup
colors, we're not putting them through the same kind of
procedures that we go through to change Tide or Pampers," Mr.
Artzt says.
   Upscale Revlon would give P&amp;G, which already controls a
good deal of supermarket and drug-store shelf space, the kind
of greater mass essential to building profit margins and more
global markets.
   After meeting Mr. Perelman in Cincinnati, Mr. Artzt
assigned teams of dozens of marketing, financial operating
and legal staffers to review Revlon's businesses, mostly
those overseas. The thorough nature of these examinations has
surprised Revlon's top management, including Mr. Perelman,
who recently noted to investment bankers that Revlon itself
has bought companies on much less information than what P&amp;G
now possesses about his company.
   It isn't clear whether P&amp;G is interested in buying all of
Revlon or simply certain pieces. The whole company might cost
more than $3 billion.
   Depending on what P&amp;G goes after, there could be antitrust
problems. P&amp;G's Cover Girl has about 23% of the mass-market
cosmetics business in all outlets, while Revlon's Max Factor
and Almay and Revlon lines account for 21%.
   The Justice Department has already thwarted one of Mr.
Artzt's earlier attempts to market Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's
Maalox because P&amp;G already sells Pepto Bismol, a stomach
remedy. Both P&amp;G and Revlon lawyers have concluded that in
the event of a merger, they would try to convince the
government that the cosmetics market is more fragmented than
what the mass market numbers show. They don't include, for
example, the sales of door-to-door operators such as Avon
Products Inc.
   Last Thursday, Revlon officials feared their talks with
P&amp;G and others might be jeopardized when news of them
surfaced. But Mr. Artzt telephoned Mr. Perelman to tell him
that P&amp;G still intended to go full speed ahead with the
talks, people familiar with the conversation say.
   ---
   Laurie P. Cohen contributed to this article.
   ---
         Procter &amp; Gamble: Looking After Consumers
                                                                                                       

   Lines of business as a percent of fiscal 1990 revenue
                                                                                                       

   Personal care                        47.7%
   Laundry and cleaning products        32.2
   Food and beverage                    13.4
   Pulp and chemicals                    6.7
                                                                                                       

   Selected P&amp;G brand names, as a percent of their respective
markets
                                                                                                       

   Pampers and Luvs diapers             50%
   Crest                                34
   Oil of Olay*                         24
   Cover Girl                           23
   Secret                               14
   Pert Plus                            13
   Head &amp; Shoulders                     12
   Clarion cosmetics                     5
                                                                                                       

   *As a percent of the mass market face creams and lotions
                                                                                                       

   Source: Wertheim Schroder
</TEXT>
</DOC>
