ID: 292	RANK: 64	SCORE: 15.854265
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910913-0009
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910913-0009.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Law -- Legal Beat:
   Regulators Add Details of Milken's
   Alleged Influence on S&amp;L Officials
   ----
   By Wade Lambert
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
09/13/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2
</SO>
<CO>
   AMC CSV DLP KMB MXM OXY PG WNEWS
</CO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
ENERGY (ENE)
FINANCIAL (FIN)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
</MS>
<IN>
ALUMINUM (ALU)
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)
CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS (HPR)
LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)
ALL NON-FERROUS METALS (NFR)
OIL-SECONDARY (OIS)
PETROLEUM (PET)
SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)
SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)
SECURITIES (SCR)
</IN>
<NS>
BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)
LAW &amp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)
PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)
PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)
SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)
</NS>
<GV>
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)
</GV>
<RE>
CALIFORNIA (CA)
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)
MARYLAND (MD)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
OHIO (OH)
PACIFIC RIM (PRM)
TEXAS (TX)
UNITED STATES (US)
WASHINGTON (WA)
</RE>
<LP>
   Thrift regulators have provided new details of Michael
Milken's alleged influence on savings-and-loan executives in
the 1980s, painting a broad picture of bribery and swindling
at a dozen financial institutions.
   The allegations have been made in recent weeks in amended
lawsuits filed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. in
federal courts in Manhattan and Los Angeles. In their suits,
thrift regulators accuse Mr. Milken, former head of Drexel
Burnham Lambert Inc.'s junk-bond department, of defrauding
the savings-and-loan industry of billions of dollars through
rigged junk-bond transactions.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Several thrift executives -- including Charles H. Keating
Jr., chairman of the parent company of Lincoln Savings &amp;
Loan, and Thomas Spiegel of Columbia Savings &amp; Loan --
already had been linked to the alleged scheme. But the
regulators' latest filings add several new names to the list
of industry executives allegedly involved and describe how
they allegedly were enticed to take part.
   The alleged bribes and special favors range from sharing
the use of a private airplane to cutting executives in on
lucrative transactions, the suits say. In return, the
regulators claim, the thrift executives and fiduciaries
caused their companies to buy large amounts of junk bonds,
often at inflated prices and without proper financial review.
   Mr. Milken and the other defendants have denied any
wrongdoing in the thrifts' junk-bond transactions. They say
the regulators are making Drexel's junk-bond department a
scapegoat for the thrift industry's huge losses.
   "There isn't a single fact that can withstand discussion
in court that will back those charges up," said a spokesman
for Mr. Milken. Mr. Milken, who pleaded guilty last year to
six felony counts related to securities transactions, is
serving a 10-year prison sentence.
   The thrift executives who took part in the alleged scheme,
regulators said, came from CenTrust, Commonwealth Federal
Savings &amp; Loan Association, Gibraltar Savings Association,
Guaranty Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association, San Jacinto
Savings Association, Security Savings &amp; Loan, Sunbelt Savings
Assocation of Texas, and United Savings Association of Texas,
as well as Lincoln and Columbia, which all have since failed.
   Not only were thrifts involved, however. The suits also
name a former official of Fidelity Investments and an
Occidental Petroleum Corp. official, who allegedly profited
personally by having their companies buy Drexel junk bonds.
   Only Mr. Keating, Mr. Spiegel and David Paul, former head
of Miami-based Centrust, are named as co-defendants in the
regulators' civil suits against Mr. Milken. Neither Mr. Paul
nor Mr. Spiegel could be reached for comment. An attorney for
Mr. Keating declined to comment.
   By making accusations against other individuals, who
allegedly played a role but aren't yet named as defendants,
thrift regulators appear to be putting pressure on former
junk-bond customers to cooperate in the case against Mr.
Milken.
   "One of the things we are signaling to them is that we do
have evidence of their wrongdoing," said David Boies, a
partner at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, the New York law firm
representing thrift regulators in the cases.
   Mr. Boies said most of the new information comes from
people already cooperating and from documents regulators
inherited when they took over the failed thrifts.
   "Through a series of improper payments, {Mr. Milken and
others in the junk-bond department} got these fiduciaries to
buy overpriced and weak debt securities," Mr. Boies said.
"These institutions suffered very large damages because they
purchased and held these securities, while the fiduciaries
personally benefited."
   The amended suits allege that as a reward for Gibraltar's
purchase of several hundred million dollars of Drexel junk
bonds -- and as an inducement to buy more -- Mr. Milken's
group allowed Herbert Young, then chief executive officer of
the Beverly Hills, Calif., thrift, to take part in a
lucrative transaction in 1985 involving another Drexel
client. The suits said that Mr. Young made a profit of
$100,000 on the $200,000 investment in less than a month.
   The suits said that salespeople in Mr. Milken's junk-bond
department also gave "preferential treatment" to the personal
accounts at Drexel of other Gibraltar executives, including
Treasurer Terry Crow and Investment Manager T. Ole Dial, "to
ensure that they were profitable." In return, the suits said,
the Milken group sought to influence the executives'
decision-making.
   Mr. Crow, who left Gibraltar in 1986 before it failed,
said he never received any favoritism from Drexel in its
handling of his personal account and that the account didn't
affect Gibraltar business decisions. "I had accounts at
Drexel and at other places," Mr. Crow said. "I probably
didn't make any money on that {Drexel} account."
   Mr. Crow also said, "I certainly know that {Mr. Dial}
didn't receive any specialized treatment from Drexel either."
Messrs. Dial and Young couldn't be reached for comment.
   The suits also said that Mr. Milken's group assisted Mr.
Keating, former chairman of American Continental Corp., which
owned Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan, in several ventures in return
for Lincoln's participation in the alleged junk-bond
manipulation. The suits said Mr. Milken helped Mr. Keating,
who is on trial in state court in Los Angeles, promote the
Estrella development, which was described as "a speculative
desert real estate development which has since gone
bankrupt."
   The suit said Mr. Keating and executives at other thrifts
also were allowed to buy equity interests in companies making
acquisitions using junk bonds. In return, the executives'
companies bought junk bonds, the suit said. While the thrifts
were out money for the junk-bond investments, the individuals
benefited from the equity investments, the suit said.
   Similarly, the suit said Mr. Milken's group rewarded
Houston investor Charles Hurwitz, chairman of Maxxam Inc., by
raising about $1.8 billion for his takeover schemes; in
return, Mr. Hurwitz allegedly caused a thrift he owned,
United Savings Association of Texas, to buy about $1.4
billion in junk bonds underwriten by Drexel. Mr. Hurwitz
hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing.
   A spokesman for Maxxam said, "The assertions are blatantly
false and irresponsible."
   Some of the alleged favors came in the form of stock tips,
the suits said. The suits alleged that to encourage Edwin T.
McBirney, former president of Sunbelt Savings of Dallas, to
allow his thrift to be used in the scheme, Mr. Milken's group
"tipped McBirney to purchase U.S. Home warrants." The suit
said Mr. McBirney bought the securities and later sold them
for a profit. Mr. McBirney couldn't be reached for comment.
   In exchange for the participation of Security Savings,
Scottsdale, Ariz., in the junk bond scheme, the Milken group
caused Drexel to buy 600,000 shares in the thrift's closely
held holding company, the suits said. They said the stock was
bought directly from some of the holding company's directors,
including Chairman Tom R. Van Sickle and general counsel
William Foley.
   Neither Mr. Foley nor Mr. Van Sickle could be reached for
comment.
   The suits allege that executives of non-thrift Drexel
clients also were given special treatment in return for their
companies' junk-bond purchases. They add new names to the
list of individuals who allegedly benefited from the
so-called MacPherson limited partnership operated by Mr.
Milken. As previously reported, Mr. Milken is alleged to have
secretly used the partnership to enable executives and
money-managers at Drexel's clients to personally profit from
the leveraged buy-out of Storer Communications Inc.
   As previously reported, Mr. Spiegel of Columbia allegedly
made a profit of $7 million on his $132,000 MacPherson
investment. The suit said that others who benefited from
Storer investments through MacPherson include Patricia
Ostrander, formerly a junk-bond manager for Fidelity
Investments, and Ray Irani, currently chairman of Occidental
Petroleum.
   In a statement, Dr. Irani said, "That was my own personal
portfolio, and it had absolutely nothing to do with
Occidental."
   Ms. Ostrander couldn't be reached for comment. Laurence
Dwyer, a spokesman for Fidelity, said Ms. Ostrander left the
company in 1987, and that Fidelity at the time was unaware of
her alleged MacPherson trading, which would have been a
violation of company policy. Mr. Dwyer said Fidelity has
filed a civil suit against Ms. Ostrander in state court in
Massachusetts seeking to recoup any profits she allegedly
made through the MacPherson partnership. The Fidelity suit
seeks to have any profits she made turned over to the funds
that she managed.
   ---
   JUDGE RESOLVES diaper-flap flap.
   A U.S. district court judge in Seattle ruled that
Kimberly-Clark Corp. invented cuffs that control leaks in
disposable diapers. But the judge said the so-called
containment flaps on rival Procter &amp; Gamble Co.'s diapers
don't violate Kimberly-Clark patents. He ruled that P&amp;G won't
have to pay Kimberly-Clark damages.
   Judge William Dwyer, ruling on a 1989 suit, said the
patented flaps inside the leg openings of P&amp;G's Pampers brand
are different and don't infringe on Kimberly-Clark's patent
for its Huggies brand.
   The suit is one round in the ongoing battle between the
two diaper kingpins, which control more than 80% of the $4.3
billion U.S. disposable diaper market. Several other suits
are pending in various courts, including antitrust suits
filed by Kimberly-Clark accusing P&amp;G of trying to monopolize
the diaper market.
   P&amp;G, which makes Pampers and Luvs, has nearly 50% of the
disposable diaper market. Huggies is the leading brand with
about 33% of the market.
   Still pending is a dispute before the U.S. Patent Office
in which Kimberly-Clark is asking for a determination that
its patent should prevail over the one issued to P&amp;G and that
it has exclusive patent rights to the flaps. "We feel Judge
Dwyer's ruling supports our argument that we have exclusive
rights to all forms of the containment flaps," said Tina
Barry, a Kimberly-Clark vice president.
   In Cincinnati, a P&amp;G spokeswoman said "we'll have to wait
and see what happens when the issue comes before patent
officials."
   ---
   NOTED: Banking-law specialist Ronald R. Glancz has become
a partner in the Washington office of Venable, Baetjer,
Howard &amp; Civiletti, a 300-lawyer firm based in Baltimore. Mr.
Glancz will lead the law firm's bank-regulatory practice. He
had been a partner in the Washington office of Drinker,
Biddle &amp; Reath, a Philadelphia firm, and previously worked as
assistant general counsel at the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corp. and as litigation director for the Comptroller of the
Currency. . . . Former FDIC assistant general counsel Howard
L. Feinstein has become counsel in the Washington office of
Thacher Proffitt &amp; Wood, a 120-lawyer firm based in New York.
Mr. Feinstein headed the FDIC's conflicts and resolutions
unit, which was formed almost two years ago to assist in
bank- and thrift-fraud prosecutions and to resolve competing
claims between failed thrifts and banks.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
