ID: 292	RANK: 83	SCORE: 15.192564
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880120-0071 </DOCNO>
<HL> A Top Marketer Of Baby Diapers To Be Acquired --- U.S. Companies May Face Stronger Rival in Europe After Peaudouce Deal --- A Wall Street Journal News Roundup </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> TNM HHP </IN>
<TEXT>
   A Swedish forestry group's agreement to buy Peaudouce, a market leader in disposable diapers and hygiene products in Europe, will mean an "extremely strong" force in a growing market where European and U.S. companies are sharply competitive, said an official for a unit of the Swedish company. 

   Svenska Celulosa AB, a diversified forestry group, said its paper and consumer products division agreed to buy its French rival Peaudouce from Societe Fonciere &amp; Financiere Agache-Willot S.A. for 1.96 billion French francs ($344 million). 

   SCA said the acquisition would bolster its fast-growing Moelnlycke AB unit, a leading maker in Scandinavia and northern Europe of paper tissues and related products such as bandages and diapers. 

   The move comes in a market on the brink of substantial growth, industry officials say. 
It's also a market that's of increasing importance to such U.S. companies as Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Scott Paper Co. and James River Corp., all of which are expanding in Europe. 

   Analysts say Peaudouce is the main competition to U.S. companies in one giant segment of the market-disposable diapers. 
P&amp;G, Colgate-Palmolive Co. and Peaudouce each have about 20% of the French disposable diaper market and 20% each of the British diaper market, according to Hugh Zurkuhlen, analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc. 
He said Cincinnati-based P&amp;G has about 20% of the Italian market and 60% of the West German market. 
An SCA-Peaudouce combination could provide cost advantages to the French company, analysts added. 

   "Europe is very important to P&amp;G," says Jay H. Freedman, analyst with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co. Mr. Zurkuhlen said, though, that he doesn't see the SCA-Peaudouce combination threatening P&amp;G's market share in Europe because SCA isn't "that consumer oriented." 

   Analysts say P&amp;G, which has been selling upgraded disposable diapers in Europe, recently has come back strongly there as a result of an international restructuring and is increasing its market share. 
P&amp;G sells Ultra Pampers and Ultra Pampers Plus, a more absorbent diaper line that has improved fasteners, Mr. Freedman said. 

   "Pampers remains a strong brand throughout Europe and is a leader in some countries," a P&amp;G spokesman said. 
He didn't disclose the countries in which Pampers is the leader. 
"We're finding that the super absorbent disposable diapers are popular throughout Europe." 
P&amp;G declined comment on the SCA acquisition of Peaudouce and also declined comment on any impact that combination might have on the company. 
The company also declined comment on market share estimates given by analysts. 

   The European market for disposable diapers, bathroom tissue and related sanitary paper products is viewed in the industry as a major growth opportunity. 
Throughout Western Europe, per-capita consumption of such products still lags U.S. levels significantly. 

   In the past four years, Scott, for example, has made major investments in France, Belgium, Britain, Italy and Spain. 
Earnings from European businesses quadrupled between 1985 and 1987. 
Last July, Scott Chairman Philip Lipincott set a sales target of $1 billion for Europe by 1990, constituting about a fourth of total company sales. 

   Among Scott's European brands are Andrex, the leading bathroom tissue in Britain, and Le Trefle, a popular French line of sanitary paper goods. 
Scott also markets Cotonelle bathroom tissue in Italy and the Sancel line in Spain. 
Sancel includes such recent product-line extensions as metholated facial tissue and decorative picnic napkins. 

   Similarly, Richmond, Va.-based James River has been aggressively boosting its presence in Europe, last month buying a 50% stake in Kayersberg S.A., the leading French producer of sanitary paper products. 

   As for the SCA unit and Peaudouce, "the two companies complement each other extraordinarily well, since they work with the same products but are strong in different geographic markets," said Moelnlycke's president, Tore Daun. 
He said the combination is "extremely strong" and would permit the paper-products group, one of Europe's largest, to compete on a stronger footing with its international rivals. 

   Mr. Daun said he expects to complete Moelnlycke's acquisition of Peaudouce in about two months, subject to approval from the French Ministry of Finance and Sweden's central bank, the Riksbank. 

   Securities analysts said the acquisition of Peaudouce will enable Moelnlycke to rationalize product-development and spread out its marketing costs. 
The tissue and paper-products businesses operate on thin margins and require high market-share to stay profitable, they said. 

   "It's a competitive industry and growing more and more sophisticated all the time," said Peter Mansson, a forestry analyst with Svenska Handelsbanken. 
"With that background, this is a good acquisition." 

   Moelnlycke employs about 8,500 people and had sales last year of 6.37 billion Swedish kronor ($1.05 billion). 
Peaudouce, which employs about 2,500 workers, had sales of about 2.6 billion French francs. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
