ID: 247	RANK: 53	SCORE: 12.359764
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910214-0135
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910214-0135.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Gardening:
   Hearts and Flowers: The Nosegay Express
   ----
   By Patti Hagan
</HL>
<DATE>
02/14/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12
</SO>
<LP>
   Here we are, V-Day 1991, and a flowery mail-order catalog
has saved me from the lists of Valentine's procrastinators.
Otherwise, I might have made my valentine flower arrangements
on the subway yesterday, humored by a supposed New York Post
story blown up on a poster. "300 LB. QUEENS MAN MOVED BY 800
FLOWERS," and bylined Iris Inavase. "A 300 lb. Queens man,
52, was reduced to tears today by 800 Flowers," Ms. Inavase
wrote. "To look at him, you would have thought it would take
a professional moving company to budge him. But all it took
was a $29.95 floral arrangement sent by 1-800-Flowers, the
24-hour-anytime-to-anyone floral delivery service." Amusing
as I found the teary-eyed Ferdinand, hankie in one hand, 800
Flowers nosegay in the other, I'd long since dialed another
floral 800 (1-800-877-7836) to reach Calyx &amp; Corolla, in
California.
   A few months ago a friend had slipped me the catalog,
figuring I'd appreciate the botanical name and the upscale
difference. Calyx &amp; Corolla does not ride the subway; C&amp;C
uses no weepy fat men. Calyx &amp; Corolla instead runs 32 pages
of flower pictures, only, on the theory that flowers best
sell flowers, quite unassisted by kittens, Dalmatians, golden
retrievers, Snoopy or Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Calyx
&amp; Corolla relies on flowers whose ancient good design makes
them virtually fashionproof: roses, daffodils, tulips, lilies
($395 for a year of lilies), orchids ($450 a year), protea.
("Botanists tell us that protea are one of the oldest flowers
on the earth," the C&amp;C care card informs. "Known to exist in
prehistoric times, they survived the trials of evolution far
better than the dinosaur.")
</LP>
<TEXT>
   Something about the catalog reminded me of Eden --
Gardener's Eden, the upscale gardening catalog -- and sure
enough Calyx &amp; Corolla, which now operates at the cutting
edge of the cut-flower business, is the latest eureka of
floral entrepreneuse Ruth Owades, the Harvard MBA. Her alma
mater immortalized her in a widely taught 1982 Business
School case study of her travails, in 1978, in founding
Gardener's Eden (one Jeremiah told her: "Gardening is a
blue-collar hobby, it'll never fly. There is no way in the
world that people will buy things for their garden. If this
was such a good idea, dearie, some man would have already
done it.").
   In 1982 she sold Boston-based Gardener's Eden to
Williams-Sonoma for a cool million but stayed on for five
years to manage G. Eden out West. By 1987, she had noticed an
empty horticultural niche in the cut-flower industry. Her
idea was to make possible a fast, fresh, Fed-Exed flower
valentine any time of the year by brokering a computer
marriage of convenience between two industries that had
heretofore never even been engaged: mail-order catalogs and
fresh cut flowers. Though her research told her the U.S.
cut-flower industry had been growing about 10% a year since
the mid-80s, she found "an industry still stuck in the '50s."
   She persuaded 25 flower growers to sign on to her computer
network. She got them to install computers, modems for
talking to the C&amp;C mainframe in San Francisco, fax machines.
And she taught them to cut flowers to order and pack them
with aesthetic TLC. Roses would be dethorned by hand and
travel with "ice pillows under their heads." Wood excelsior
would cushion their every blow. " What we go through with
gerberas is pretty amazing," Ms. Owades admits. "First of all
they are capped with net caps in the fields where they're
grown. Then because their stems tend to be weak, the grower
puts {each of} them in thick straws."
   Then, to deliver the critical Freshness Dividend, Ms.
Owades prevailed on Federal Express to add Calyx &amp; Corolla's
natural brown boxes to its "brown box business," and fly the
fresh cut flowers direct from grower to customer,
guaranteeing arrival on the exact day requested. Fed-Ex was
the crucial link in Ms. Owades's new floral-delivery
short-circuit service. In her catalog she explains that Calyx
&amp; Corolla "fresh" means "five to 10 days fresher than any
other flowers you can buy]" Her research had revealed that
"most flowers that we buy at a florist or certainly at a
Korean grocer are at least seven to 10 days old." For her
business, "I knew that the benefit had to be FRESHNESS. We
cut to order. You receive a flower that was cut 24 to 48
hours previously. You get the seven to 10 days in your vase,
instead of on a truck or in a distributor's warehouse."
   Though this is Calyx &amp; Corolla's biggest day of the year,
Americans are floral underconsumers. Ms. Owades believes
she's still battling the Puritan ethic. "It's not only that
we're puritanical and feel that we don't deserve flowers on a
regular basis, I also think that we are quite intimidated by
flowers." However, this may be changing thanks to the
puritanical American capacity for guilt. A spring 1990 Gallup
Poll, "Americans on Gift Giving," found that for 51% of
Americans "when feeling guilty, flowers and plants are the
likely gift." Ms. Owades says of subscribers to Calyx &amp;
Corolla's flowers by the year, half-year and quarter: "That's
for someone who either loves flowers or else it's a gift from
someone who feels really guilty about what he did." And in
fact C&amp;C offers a sort of rescue service for the guilty,
volunteering on the order form "if you forget or have waited
until the last minute . . . call us, we will do whatever we
can to rescue you." And then the Calyx &amp; Corolla Plant Doctor
is on call to help survivors baby their plants and flowers.
"People call back and say "it works] My gardenia is
thriving]" Ms. Owades notes. "They're so happy they want to
send him things. They're all trying to bake him chocolate
cakes. We've had to limit it. They can send recipes." Others
simply write: "If only your catalog had existed five years
ago, my wife wouldn't have left me]" They send color
snapshots of week-old bouquets still fresh. "I'm writing to
thank you for giving me `points' with my mother-in-law," one
California woman wrote. "I'd long been given to understand
that she prefers flowers to remain in gardens, I purposely
avoided sending out bouquets." But the Pink Fringed
Carnations bouquet changed everything.
   Last Feb. 14 an irate Philadelphian wrote in the
accusative: "Dear Calyx &amp; Corolla: You've ruined my love
life] How could you not have shipped the Valentine's Day
tulips to my girlfriend?]" An apology followed two days
later: "I guess `polite thank yous' are no longer a way of
life. But at least I am no longer in the doghouse."
   In January Ms. Owades sent her flower catalog to war,
addressing a special message to American servicemen and women
in the Persian Gulf: "As Valentine's Day approaches, we would
like to help you remember those that you love back home.
Although the distance to your loved ones may be great, you
can surprise them by sending them fresh, beautiful flowers
this Valentine's Day." Wishing them all home soon, she asked,
"Please identify yourself as a part of Operation Desert Storm
in order to receive your discount." 20%.
   On Jan. 16, the day the U.S. began bombing, Calyx &amp;
Corolla received a fax from a soldier on duty in Saudi
Arabia. He requested that "Love" cards and bouquets be
dispatched to five valentines in five different towns in
three states: Lori, Melissa, Dee, Beth and Georgeanne. Once
again Calyx &amp; Corolla gave new meaning to the word fresh.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
