ID: 247	RANK: 54	SCORE: 12.344878
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880412-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Gardening: 'Lady Killer' and Other Dainty Early Bloomers </HL>
<AUTHOR> Patti Hagan </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Dorothy Parker called spring "the filthy season." 
"Summer makes me drowsy," she wrote in 1928. 
"Autumn makes me sing, Winter's pretty lousy, but I hate Spring." 
Ms. Parker felt "terrible. 
Rotten," weathering yet another "mean attack of Crocus Urge." 

   Happily, the Crocus Urge affects me otherwise. 
Beginning mid-February I do daily rushes on the garden, prospecting for crocus tips punching up out of the underground. 
Crocuses surface in the barrens of the garden year, almost without competition. (I do not count the pallid snowdrops or the gangrenous-yellow winter aconites as competition.) 
By March, even as the winter-blah garden begins to be patchworked in crocus-lavender, violet, yellow, white, and their shrieking orange neon stigmata -- I realize, once again, that I do not have nearly enough crocuses. 

   Worse, I do not have nearly enough of the right kind of crocuses -- the wild kind that the McClure &amp; Zimmerman catalog (108 West Winnebago, P.O. Box 368, Friesland, WI 53935) lists under "Miscellaneous and Small Bulbs." 
In the fall of 1986 I laid in an experimental planting of crocus miscellany, and this spring is its second coming. 
"Lady Killer" (C. chrysanthus, white interior, white-edged maroon exterior) and "Hubert Edelsten" (C. sieberi, startling cool-blue lilac, awarded a first-class certificate by the Royal Horticultural Society in 1924) launched bloom on Feb. 26, followed within days by "Gypsy Girl" (C. chrysanthus, yellow interior, mocha-purple suffused exterior) and "Blue Pearl" (C. chrysanthus, icy blueing-white with bronzed base). 
Ineffably petite, delicately resilient, many of them subtly bicolored on the worldly side of their buds, these dainty crocuses bloom early and often, some of them up to 20 times per corm. 
But it wasn't until the Rubensesque Dutch burgher crocuses started shoving up across the path from them that my preference for the crocus Lilliputs registered, forte. 

   My small-crocus epiphany set me to rummaging in the crocus lit. 
Sixty years ago the American Louise Beebe Wilder was writing about "corpulent Dutch Crocuses." 
And English gardener-writers, though they start out politely enough about C. vernus, the crocus chosen to go the hybrid giant route, quickly begin bashing "the large Dutch crocus" for "flowers as fat and yellow and somehow utilitarian as electric lightbulbs" (Ursula Buchan). 
Harold Nicolson, Vita Sackville-West's husband, grumbled about "the vulgarities of modern tastes," among which he numbered "crocuses as fat as tulips," adding, "and what is the point of that?" 
The botanist-gardener-plant hunter Reginald Farrer once raged: "Anger clots the ink of my typewriter when I think of the contrast between these {species crocuses} and the fatties that we complacently cultivate in our gardens . . . the pure line of the wild species stands far beyond any comparison with the pampered obesity that flops about in gardens." 

   Now, what fat-loathing American gardener is going to own up to deliberately growing fat flowers? 
Especially when 80-odd slim, low-cal species of same exist? 
Even the late British crocus maniac, E.A. Bowles, whose motto was "crocuses everywhere," admitted the Dutch difference: "The fat, prosperous, gone into trade and done well with it, garden forms of Crocus vernus are best used for colour masses. 
The individual blooms strike me as coarse after the refined true species." 
Elsewhere Mr. Bowles noted that the Dutch catalogs of the 1920s provided a wide choice of these, if unrefined, "most showy of all Crocuses," and he cited a particular favorite, "Nigger Boy," "the darkest purple of all." (No doubt Ms. Parker, who left her estate to the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in 1967, whence it passed to the NAACP in 1968, after Dr. King's assassination, would have added this instance of floral racism to her case against the crocus. 
Given Ms. Parker's aversion to spring, perhaps the memorial garden that is to be dedicated to her at the NAACP's Baltimore headquarters will skip the spring flowers -- unless, that is, the Great Emancipator's crocus, the rich purple "President Lincoln," can be tracked down.) 

   What has seized me this spring is a fairly clinical attack of Mr. Bowles's "Crocus fever." ("It is not a dangerous disease . . . it is simply the charm of the Crocus itself. 
So be warned, and if you do not want to have Crocus fever -- do not look at Crocuses.") 
In 1896, a year after Mr. Bowles began to run a crocus fever, he had taken up with 60 kinds of companion crocuses; five years later he had 135. 
By 1914 Mr. Bowles (also of the C. sieberi "Bowles White" -- "pure white, orange throat, scarlet stigma" -- can be had from John D. Lyon, 143 Alewife Brook Parkway, Cambridge, MA 02140) declared the crocus "my first garden love" with such unreserved ardor that he worried "my {crocus} raptures may appear the vapourings of a love-sick monomaniac." 

   As a love object the crocus was unpretentious. 
"Any ground sufficiently well tilled to grow a decent lettuce or onion should grow Crocuses to perfection," he wrote. 
Mr. Bowles had an eye for a fetching crocus: "I greatly admire a gourd-shaped Crocus," such as C. chrysanthus, with a real wasp waist. 
He did allow that some crocuses have bad habits and warned about one "inveterate wanderer." 
"I am trying a concentration camp treatment and collecting any stray specimens to be planted in a pan sunk in the ground." 
And crocuses have enemies: rabbits, pheasants, mice, field voles, long-tailed wood mice and sparrows. 
Sparrows used to have a rep for selectively attacking yellow crocuses such as "E.A. 
Bowles." 
For many years this was thought to be a problem confined to English sparrows resident in England. 
In 1884 Edward Sprague Rand, a New World garden writer, gave thanks that "In this country . . . we experience little trouble from this cause." (A century later I must report that the English sparrows of Brooklyn attack crocuses of all colors with equally destructive indiscriminacy.) 
Much as Mr. Bowles would have liked it, the crocodile did not make the crocus enemy list: "It would be pleasant to try to believe in the derivation of kpokodeilos (Crocus-fearer) given by some of the ancients." 

   Right now, while the Crocus Urge is fresh, I'm planning to deport my Dutch fatties to a fat farm. 
As soon as they finish showing off out back, all corpulent crocus corms will be relocated to the street garden, safely distant from my increasingly refined rear garden. 
As New York City street crocuses, bold and flashy, they'll do just fine. 
Then, and in earnest, I will begin a crocus-slimming regimen and fill in the empty cormholes with all the species crocuses of slender build and bud that can be had. 
Why shouldn't I be as thin-minded as the next American? 
Why shouldn't I go in for low-cal crocuses, crocus sveltes, crocus slims, such as the "white, free flowering 'Miss Vain'"? 
I'm hoping, of course, that the whole thin-minded American gardening public will also be switching to crocus lites. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
