ID: 247	RANK: 6	SCORE: 19.789921
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871127-0175 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
A Tulipomaniac's Notes
---
By Patti Hagan</HL>
<DD> 11/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   I came late to tulips. 
Until about five years ago, I didn't much like the turban flowers: too big, too bold -- too hybrid? 
Then, an imperious gardening mentor of 80 plant-opinionated years presented me a Christmas bag of tulips -- big reds -- Giant Darwin Hybrids. 
To be polite, I planted them. (Such unsubtle flowers could easily become cut flowers before they disrupted the strict color code of my studiously understated garden.) 

   Instead, that spring, the Darwins put the kibosh on my tulip prejudice. 
They were too big, too bright, too red, but they were also tulipically fragranced, had spectacular black basal blotches, and such light-responsive calisthenic petals that I could tell time by tulip. 

   Thus began my tulipomania. 
Soon the Darwins were joined by Cottage, Triumph, Emperor, Peony, Lily-flowering, Viridiflora, Breeder and my favorites, the Parrot, Rembrandt and Bizarre, those highly inflamed flowers whose color had been fractured by the tulip-breaking virus. 

   Last fall, for a change of tulip, I ordered three of the species, or botanicals, the small, supposedly wild -- primitive, at any rate -- Mediterranean antecedents of the big Dutch hybrids: T. Turkestanica, T. dasystemon and T. Saxatilis. 
On April 1, in 31-degree weather, Turkestanica began its long bloom run: clusters of dainty, very-lily-white flowers with yellow baseblots, five or so to a five-inch stem. 
On April 14 dasystemon, yellow and white, piquant of face and low down to the ground, came on, followed on May Day by a single saxatilis bloom that knocked an out-loud "WOW!" from me. 
The flower had an old-rose-pink cup, charming yellow bottom, patent-leather-shiny green leaves and a stunning fragrance. 
So taken was I by these T.s I scarcely paid mind all spring to the loud, brassy hybrids breaking and flaming and feathering nearby, though I was still getting my noon time-fix by sighting on the flat-out petals of the big red Darwins. 

   Thus began my mini-tulipomania, my mini-manic expectations fueled by happening on the Chicago flower-bulb brokerage firm of McClure &amp; Zimmerman's "Continuing Education Series on Bulbs for American Gardens: WILD TULIPS OF THE WORLD." 
The Mc. &amp; Z. catalog had 33 different unhybridized tulips and guaranteed that all had been "harvested from commercial sources." 
Next came the White Flower Farm catalog with eight wild T.s and the wisdom of that fictitious house sage Amos Pettingill that these tulips were "more perennial than the conventional" ones. 
Most of the other fall catalogs also listed at least a few of the wild tulipae. 
I began to suspect a wild-tulipo-trend. 

   While awaiting the tiny tulips I read about them. 
I was immediately diverted by Louise Beebe Wilder's "Adventures With Hardy Bulbs" (1936), in which the redoubtable Mrs. Wilder, faced by an earlier wild-T. boomlet, opined: "American gardeners are beginning to realize something of {the wild tulips'} fascination, and the attitude toward them has become much less oblique . . . but on the whole, the great hybrid Tulips, the Darwins, Cottages, Breeders (Single Late) and the like, still successfully hold the stage against the wild species." 
A generic American bulb scold, she complained: "There are not enough bulbous plants grown in this country." 

   Of T. acuminata, the Fireflame Tulip, Mrs. Wilder wrote: "This fantastic plant . . . is said to have appeared among gardeners about 1816 from the general direction of the Levant." 
To her, "the very long and narrow segments suggest the finger nails of the mandarin." (To Mc. &amp; Z.: "We plant it as a 'shocker' to confound friends who've never seen a wacky tulip before.") 
Mrs. Wilder seems to dote on Tulipa sylvestris, "this charming tramp" (a k a the Wild British Tulip) that has a "small butter-yellow flower with the scent of hothouse violets . . . the shy grace common to most wild things," and advises that it be allowed to dwell in peace "not pressed upon by stout perennials." 
She relates Linnaeus's observation that "the flowers of this species do not open before 10 o'clock in the morning, whereas those of the garden Tulip are wide open before eight." (Yet another chronoflower.) 
T. dasystemon, "a small wonder of a Tulip," and perhaps her favorite, has "leaves lying flat upon the ground like a star-fish . . . charming fragrant blossoms . . . from Turkestan," while T. Clusiana, the Lady Tulip, is "gay and charming" and "named for the great botanist Clusius, who cultivated it in his garden in Flanders." 
T. persica is "this lovely dwarf . . . from Persia . . . very fragrant. 
Do not miss it." 
T. linifolia is "this small bit of brilliance" from northern Persia with "a dark blotch at the heart," while T. pulchella is, simply, "a delightful mite." 
The Cretan tulip, saxatilis, however, she charges with "stinginess of behavior," this species having "never seen fit to give me a single flower. 
After the manner of Tulips generally, if it is not going to bloom, it sends up a single leaf, not apparently wishing to leave one under any misapprehension as to its intentions." 
And while Mrs. Wilder cautions readers not to expect from species tulips the sort of life everlasting common to daffodils and crocuses, nevertheless if happily situated in a hot, sunny, sharply drained spot, the little tulips "will outstay the great hybrid Tulips that are planted in millions every year -- a truth I have not before seen brought forward in their favor." 

   My tulipomanias peaked just as the stock market crashed the other Monday, when I was immersed in reading about the infamous Dutch market crash of 1637 that ended the spectacular three-year tulip-futures lunacy -- the original Tulipomania. 
In "The Embarrassment of Riches," Simon Schama writes: "By early 1637, the height of the speculation, the point of the purchase had long since ceased to be a tulip bulb and instead had become a negotiable piece of paper." 
By February, "amid conditions of general panic in Haarlem, bulb prices were dropping by the hour, and . . . there was talk of stock becoming unsalable. 
As for tulip futures, these had become worthless." 

   If you still want to place a forward order on "wild" tulip bulbs -- and why not? the downside is sharply limited -- try any of the following: McClure &amp; Zimmerman, 1422 West Thorndale, Chicago, Ill. 60660; White Flower Farm, Litchfield, Conn. 06759-0050; The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, N.Y. 10458-5126; Wayside Gardens, Hodges, S.C. 29695-0001; John D. Lyon Co., 143 Alewife Brook Parkway, Cambridge, Mass. 02140; John Scheepers, Philipsburg Road, R.D. 2, Middletown, N.Y. 10940. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
