ID: 247	RANK: 64	SCORE: 11.795247
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870306-0117 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Gardening:
Tea With George Among the Roses
---
By Patti Hagen</HL>
<DD> 03/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Philadelphia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   By March, residents of the Northeast will do almost anything for spring, including force the issue. 
Spring 1987 will arrive, therefore, on Sunday, March 8, 10 a.m. EST, at the Philadelphia Flower Show, and will be made to stay through the 15th. 

   For the moment, this city beats all outdoors, pre-vernal vernalization, having made thousands of tulips, daffodils, hyacinths, hollyhocks, foxgloves, primroses, dogwoods, mountain laurels, azaleas and rhododendrons break and bloom. 

   The Pennsylvania Horticultural Society produces this breath of false spring under a broad thematic canopy: "The Way We Were." 
Major exhibitors offer three gardens with gazebos, two with loggia, two with old-fashioned American water wheels, one half-sized Royal Botanic Gardens Kew Palm House, one Fairmount Park Victorian Guard Box, one "lavish Gatsby-style ballroom," one hot-air-flower-toting-balloon launch site, one "computerized garden depicting the restoration work being done at Temple University's Beatrix Farrand garden," one outback outhouse in a pine thicket, and one dinosaur nest ("The Way We Were Before We Were"). 
All this amid an irregular forest of 25-foot white pines and willows, weeping and erect. 

   Theme central, the Keystone exhibit, "Tea at Gray's Ferry," honors George Washington. 
He sipped here on July 17, 1787. 
It's as if he's just left, exiting through Jay Gatsby's West Egg Ballroom and up the escalator. 
Because GW conscientiously confided such doings as "made an excursion to Gray's Ferry to Tea" to his diary -- while presiding over the Constitutional Convention, garden historian Elizabeth McLean has been able to give the Constitution's bicentennial its horticultural due. 

   During his four months in Philadelphia, GW often "rid to" visit the country seats of John Penn and the acclaimed gardens of William Hamilton (who used to send his gardeners to the docks to gather interesting seeds and plants from ship captains) and William Bartram. 
On June 10, 1787: "rid to see the Botanical garden of Mr. Bartram; which, tho' Stored with many curious plts. 
Shrubs &amp; trees, many of which are exotics was not laid off with much taste, nor was it large." 

   He also visited "the Farm of one Jones, to see the effect of the plaister of Paris," the "manure" of the moment, on wheat stubble. 
On half a dozen occasions George Washington repaired to Gray's Ferry to "drk. 
Tea . . . after not less than five, for a large part of the time Six, and sometimes 7 hours sitting everyday" writing the law of the new land. 

   The Gray's Ferry here and now is a historically faithful rendering of the popular public refreshment gardens on the west bank of the Schuylkill River commissioned by the Gray family, proprietors of the tavern there, who, according to historian McLean "thought a garden was what you had to have to attract customers." 
They hired Samuel Vaughan, an Englishman, to design their garden, and a number of its most interesting elements have made it to the Philadelphia Civic Center. 
There is a greenhouse with Palladian windows containing the "hot plant items of 1787" in display pots: the "brand-new coveted 'exotic'" Ailanthus altissima, a ginkgo and a tomato, the "paradise apple" of the late 18th century; a period watering can; and a bottle of "Tobacco Water," the insecticide of necessity. 
(Mrs. McLean concocted this poison at home using two "very expensive Havana cigars soaked in hot water.") 

   On the wall is Bartram's Garden catalog and just outside the greenhouse is a "plant-sending Box" filled with "pecan nuts from Illinois" that James Madison was about to dispatch to Thomas Jefferson in Paris. (George Washington sent some home to Mount Vernon.) 
There is a summer house with more Palladian windows for taking in the garden vistas. 
According to Mrs. McLean, "The show carpenter, who's a genius, was stymied by the cupola" in a bell-roof shape. 

   Mrs. McLean was not. 
She simply Xeroxed "Examples of Various Roofs Executed, with the Scantlings. . . . 
With Rules for MORTICES and TENONS" from "The Carpenter and Joiner's Assistant" (1805) and the plates illustrating "how to fix a conical top over a square room," taking into account "hyperbolical arches" and how "to find the angle at the back of the hip rafters." 
There is an arbor covered by an American native vine, the scentless "scarlet honeysuckle" (Lonicera sempervirens), because, as the label explains, "the Japanese honeysuckle did not arrive in this country until the 19th century." 
Rosa chinensis 'Old Blush,' "an exciting new arrival, and a change from the 'old-fashioned' roses which had come from Europe earlier" shares the arbor. 
There is also Chinese bridge downstream from a waterfall, and a lawn. 

   Given the 20th-century suburban American obsession with lawn perfection, this Constitutional Convention-era lawn is stunning. 
Mrs. McLean has deliberately cultivated dandelions and thistles because "we wanted to show that the lawn was not perfect. 
The lawn mower hadn't been invented." (That adaptation, from the carpet-cutter, was still some 50 years off.) 
States the lawn label: "A 1787 'lawn' was scythed: fine lawn-grasses, lawn-mowers and weed-killers were not part of the picture." 
Nor were hybrid bedding plants. 
Plant antiques were searched out with the assistance of Peter Hatch, the Monticello plant historian -- and brought along by Charles and Chuck Gale of Gale Nurseries. 
Especially notable are the modest, species marigolds, Tagetes erecta and T. patula and the much sought after geranium, Pelargonium inquinans, plus familiar tickseed, spider flower, beebalm, forget-me-not, sweet William, larkspur, hollyhock, heliotrope and weeping willow. 

   Gale Nurseries also weighs in with its own strapping six-foot spikes of larkspur, delphinium, hollyhock and foxglove -- all tricked into March efflorescence. 
The Gales, father and son, designed this classical English garden of perennial borders, then recruited England's Rosemary Verey to tie her own herbal love knot at the center of it. 
Daniel Kepich invented an "early-morning mist machine" (punching CO2 into boiling water) to give the right look to a Penn's Woods hillside scattered with beech and oak trees, redbud and dogwood, and 450 or so bushels of dry leaves, vintage '86. 

   Other ways that we were at Philadelphia include: Plume Orchids' dinosaur nest display with five brontosaurus eggs and a couple of dino-hatchlings. 
This prehistoric landscape is massively orchidic, with supporting roles going to cycads, tree ferns, palms and mosses. 

   So go and be refreshed, any time between 10 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. (Sunday closing is at 6 p.m.) 

   ---
   Ms. Hagen gardens in Brooklyn, N.Y. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
