ID: 247	RANK: 85	SCORE: 10.614552
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880802-0117 </DOCNO>
<HL> Gilding the Lilies: George Heublein Built An Empire of Flowers That Rapidly Faded --- Melridge Inc. Blossomed For Three Short Seasons On Dreams and 'Schemes' --- Evocations of Tulipomania </HL>
<AUTHOR> James P. Miller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PRO BCY </IN>
<TEXT>
   "A golden bait hung temptingly out before the people, and one after the other, they rushed to the tulip-marts, like flies around a honey-pot. . . ." 

   --Description of 17th-century Europe's "Tulipomania" speculation craze in "Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds," by Charles Mackay, 1841. 

   In 1634, an obsession with tulips inexplicably became a speculative financial frenzy in Holland. 
Investors spent family fortunes on nothing more than a single bulb, hoping to make big profits later. 
The inevitable collapse ruined holders of the suddenly worthless bulbs. 

   Melridge Inc., of tiny Aurora, Ore., is probably the costliest investment debacle to hit the flower business since Tulipomania. 
Starting in 1983 under its flamboyant chairman, George R. Heublein, the developer of exotic lilies became an international flower power, acquiring companies that gave it an interest in each stage of a flower's commercial life, from bulb to bouquet. 
Melridge became a hot over-the-counter stock, whose share price increased nearly sixfold in less than three years, to give it a market value of $100 million at its peak in the autumn of 1986. 

   A former officer reports that Melridge's headquarters once displayed a sign reading: "An ounce of image is worth a pound of performance." 
Indeed, Mr. Heublein was a nonstop promoter of his company's image, glibly selling Wall Street and even other flower concerns on his vision that Melridge would become the "McDonald's of flowers," the "IBM of flowers" or the "Bill Blass of flowers." 
The enterprise, he promised, would be "more integrated than General Motors." 

   He lectured at Cornell University on "Melridge: The Entrepreneurial Spirit That Blossomed," and he gave lots of interviews. 
How the man could talk. 
The author of a memorable Esquire profile of Mr. Heublein in May 1987, titled "Hotter than a Pistil," wrote that "he drives his accountants crazy with his dreams." 
The article quoted Mr. Heublein on his goal after leaving college. 
He wanted a career, he said, that was "gutsy, real, evil, conniving." 

   Robert J. Kane, who succeeded Mr. Heublein as Melridge's chairman last October, says, "His wishes were fulfilled." 
Mr. Heublein was ousted by his directors, who later filed a fraud suit (which is still pending) against him, as Melridge crashed into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings. 
That move is likely to leave many of the investors who bought more than $50 million of Melridge's shares and debt as emptyhanded as those tulip traders of yore. 
According to piles of documents amassed in the U.S. district court in Portland, Ore., from filings and pretrial hearings on Melridge's lawsuit, Mr. Heublein created his own "extraordinary popular delusion" with a maze of phony Dutch flower royalties, inflated expenses and foreign bank accounts. 

   Former Melridge officials' sworn statements filed with the Portland federal court in support of the company's lawsuit suggest that Mr. Heublein kept the complicated scheme going for nearly four years with the help of other Melridge officers and a Dutch bulb broker, and with a lot of fast-stepping between Europe and the U.S. 

   Among other things, former officers have testified, Mr. Heublein ordered up faked earnings per share, which allegedly enabled him to reap big insider-trading profits. 
He even threatened to kill one protesting officer and his wife, the officer says in a sworn statement. 
The statement also alleges that Melridge also indirectly financed a smuggling operation in Burundi that came to an untimely end because of a bounced check. 

   During this period, the accounting firm Price Waterhouse gave Melridge clean financial opinions, and an underwriter, Boettcher &amp; Co., led a syndicate that took Melridge public, and later made a second offering. 
Both Price Waterhouse and Boettcher deny culpability. 
Price Waterhouse, for its part, says it had to rely on European auditors who examined operations abroad. 

   Mr. Heublein declines to comment on Melridge's problems and his own. 
"I'd love to give my side of the story," says the dapper 47-year-old. 
"But I cannot because I have taken the Fifth Amendment." 
In a recent filing with the Portland federal court that says he has "consistently maintained his innocence of any wrongdoing," Mr. Heublein formally invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege because he is the subject of a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation. 
"The only thing I can give when I go into court is my name, rank and serial number," he says. 

   Melridge's attorneys are more forthright, alleging in court that Mr. Heublein engaged in "rampant and active" fraud based on financial reports that were "straight blue sky." 

   "He's really a crook of the first stripe," Melridge lawyer William F. Martson Jr. asserted recently in the Portland court, adding that Mr. Heublein "raised $50 million from the public on cooked books." 

   "Many persons grow insensibly attached to that which gives them a great deal of trouble. . . . 
Upon the same principle we must account for the unmerited encomia lavished upon these fragile blossoms." 

   With a partner, Mr. Heublein bought Melridge for $600,000 in 1975, when it was a loss-ridden developer of patented, crossbred lilies called Oregon Bulb Farms. 
The company grew quickly by selling cut flowers and aggressively marketing its bulbs in Europe, particularly the Netherlands. 
In 1983, Mr. Heublein greatly expanded the scope and number of agreements the company reached with Dutch growers, under which they agreed to pay Melridge license fees for the right to grow its exotic lily strains. 

   The royalty agreements, which improved the company's financial prospects, helped Melridge go public in late 1983, raising $3.9 million. 
In the next three years, its annual sales quadrupled to $25.3 million, and reported annual profit tripled to $3.2 million. 
As a result, Melridge's stock price soared 581% to a (pre-split) high of $37.50 a share in mid-1986, while investors forked over $48 million to buy additional stock and debt offerings. 

   But, because of secret side agreements that effectively negated the licensees' obligations to acquire the bulbs, the license agreements were largely phony, according to Melridge's lawsuit and a statement from an independent auditor entered as supporting evidence. 
Former officials have also signed sworn statements that other accounting irregularities, involving overvalued assets and inventory, were commonplace. 

   A Dutch bulb broker, Homme Mantel, who had signed most of the royalty pacts, said in a sworn statement early this year that he didn't receive any bulbs and didn't pay Melridge any money. 
Instead, Mr. Heublein indirectly routed to him nearly $2 million in cash from various sources, and Mr. Mantel forwarded the money to Melridge as "license payments." 
At other times, a Dutch law firm sent the money on behalf of Mr. Mantel. 

   Mr. Heublein generated part of the cash that was funneled to Mr. Mantel's account by getting suppliers to overbill Melridge for greenhouses and equipment, according to Melridge's suit. 
The suit also contends that Mr. Heublein routed $2.8 million in profit from his personal trading in Melridge shares to his own Swiss bank account. 
While the paper trail can't be traced completely without a court order, lawyer Martson told the court, Mr. Heublein's presence in Switzerland on the day funds were transferred to Mr. Mantel's Netherlands account means there is little doubt Mr. Heublein was funneling his own money to "prop up" his alleged license scheme. 

   "Mr. 
Heublein would have a practice of announcing in advance the {earnings} per share without any factual support, and then he would direct {officers} to cook the books in order to meet those earnings per share," Mr. Martson told the federal court in Portland. 

   Mr. Heublein lived well during this period, buying a house in Portland's West Hills for $550,000, and billing Melridge $300,000 for personal expenses, including a nanny and a gardener. 
At one point, his stake in Melridge was worth more than $30 million. 
He also went on a corporate shopping spree, building headquarters and an extensive plant just outside Aurora, and buying small flower growers, distributors, wholesalers, retailers and import-export operations in the U.S., Europe and Africa. 

   Mr. Heublein isn't accused of being a run-of-the-mill scam operator. 
He was bolder and brasher than that. 
Melridge in its lawsuit asserts, for example, that Mr. Heublein wasn't content with claiming phony income from Dutch growers. 
He also claimed $1 million in mythical foreign-exchange gains from mythical guilders received from the Dutch. 
That transaction "probably had Mr. Heublein chuckling in his shoes," Mr. Martson told the Portland federal court. 

   Former officials, in sworn statements, detail how millions of dollars took questionable routes through Austria, the Netherlands and even Burundi. 
For example, Christopher Shelton, a former general manager of Melridge's Dutch operations, says that nearly $1 million was invested in an unprofitable flower plantation in Burundi, which also served as a front for smuggling color televisions and stereos. 
He doesn't claim that Mr. Heublein was aware of the smuggling, however. 

   The operation was unmasked in December 1986, when one of the smugglers' customers bounced a check for four million Burundi francs (about $40,000). 
Burundian officials became suspicious when Melridge's representative didn't want to prosecute. 

   "The language of complaint and reproach was in everybody's mouth, and all the meetings were of the most stormy character." 

   Mr. Heublein's own alleged scheme began to unravel in late 1986. 
Although Price Waterhouse gave a clean opinion to Melridge's financial statements for the year ended July 31, a sharp drop in fourth-quarter earnings and strange accounting changes made some American investors suspicious. 
Short-sellers such as the wellknown Feschbach brothers of Menlo Park, Calif., began to sell Melridge shares short in the early months of 1987; their heavy sales helped drive down the price of shares by 50% in a period of several months. 

   On June 1, 1987, Mr. Shelton of Melridge's Dutch operation also started talking to Mr. Kane, the director who later succeeded Mr. Heublein as chairman. 
Mr. Shelton and the company's controller privately told Mr. Kane that many of Melridge's transactions were in disarray. 
Mr. Shelton then resigned in August, after refusing to sign certain audit documents. 
Mr. Heublein two days later told him in a phone conversation that "I'll have you liquidated" and "your wife's life could also be in danger" if Mr. Shelton told bank lenders of his resignation, according to Mr. Shelton's sworn statement. 
Mr. Shelton kept mum. 

   Mr. Heublein had another problem in June. 
His chief financial officer and brother-in-law, Gary Wood, suddenly resigned. 
And Mr. Heublein hired a former financial officer of Kentucky Fried Chicken Inc., James Marohn, to replace him. 

   "That may have been one of George's key mistakes," says Mr. Kane. 
"He hired an honest person." 

   After poring over the books for weeks, Mr. Marohn, on Sept. 10, took a Price Waterhouse official with him to visit Mr. Kane and told him that numbers for the first three quarters of fiscal 1987 were "off the wall," with earnings overstated through a variety of improper accounting procedures. 
Mr. Kane, head of the board's audit committee, then confronted Mr. Heublein, who in turn furiously accused Mr. Marohn of stirring up trouble, Mr. Kane says. 
Subsequently, Mr. Heublein tried to fire Mr. Marohn, but the board, meeting by telephone, refused to allow it. 

   At about the same time, Price Waterhouse sent out a routine letter asking the Dutch bulb broker, Mr. Mantel, to confirm that he owed Melridge $6 million in license fees, but he refused, thus focusing interest on the royalty agreements. 

   After hearing Mr. Marohn's review of Melridge's books at a showdown board meeting on Oct. 2, directors removed Mr. Heublein as chairman and named Mr. Kane, allowing Mr. Heublein to continue as president and chief executive. 
Three weeks later, after the board became convinced that the investigation involved possible fraud, not just mismanagement, Mr. Heublein was stripped of those posts, too. 

   "No measure could be devised likely to give satisfaction to the deluded people, or repair even a slight portion of the mischief that had been done." 

   Melridge now is suing Mr. Heublein and others, seeking damages of $40 million, including the remaining contents in that Swiss bank account. 
Records show that Mr. Heublein visited Switzerland soon after the first October board meeting. 
He also swiftly transferred ownership of the West Hills house to his wife, as an "anniversary gift." 
Melridge is also seeking recovery of the more than $300,000 in personal expenses Mr. Heublein had billed to the company. 

   Melridge shareholders haven't asked court permission to sue the company under procedures that protect companies in Chapter 11. 
But they are suing Price Waterhouse and the underwriter, Boettcher &amp; Co. 
Some of them can't understand how the Feschbach brothers could deduce so much from the fiscal 1986 financial statement, and Price Waterhouse, which certified it, so little. 

   "Those people didn't even know what due diligence meant," asserts William A. Roozen Sr., a competing flower grower and small Melridge shareholder. 
"Due diligence is nowhere to be found." 

   A Boettcher official said allegations in the shareholder suits regarding the firm are "without merit," adding that the company will "vigorously defend" the litigation and expects to prevail. 

   A Price Waterhouse official says its opinions pointed out that it relied on European auditors to check out operations there. 
The firm's audit "satisfied all professional standards," the official said, and if the charges against Mr. Heublein are true, "Price Waterhouse was one of many victims of an extremely sophisticated fraud. . . ." 

   Melridge hopes to emerge from Chapter 11 as a much smaller company, but in a June 1988 filing, it said that it believes its common shareholders' equity has been completely erased by perhaps $30 million in losses associated with writing down overvalued assets and other steps it has taken in the wake of Mr. Heublein's departure. 
The stock now trades at less than 50 cents a share. 

   "Those who were unlucky enough to have had stores of tulips on hand at the time of the sudden reaction were left to bear their ruin as philosophically as they could . . . ." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
