ID: 247	RANK: 87	SCORE: 10.426697
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890822-0112 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890822 </DD>
<AN> 890822-0112. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
@  Dust to Dust: Undertakings in the Garden
@  ----
@  By Patti Hagan </HL>
<DD> 08/22/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> Brooklyn, N.Y.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   For nine years I have been the super of a city garden and now I know for sure: No two denizens read a city garden the same way. 
As for one's own, you don't really know how your garden's going over until the day you hear the folks next door refer to "that jungle"; until you've sent Thelonious Monk, the rooster you'd rescued from full-moon ceremonies at the local voodoo parlor, up the river to be with some hens near Sing Sing, and the selfsame neighbors express dismay at his absence -- whereas the lawyer two doors down had phoned daily to ascertain your longterm intentions in re "that rooster" whose crowing was wrecking his sleeping. 
But I did not know what the upstairs folks in the brownstone across the street thought until the night this spring they phoned about my garden, at 10 p.m. 

   These people had wanted to visit when the clematis-rose-peony-iris ensemble peaked, so I assumed they were making an appointment for the blooming weekend. 
Not exactly. 
They wanted to arrange an undertaking. 
"You see," my neighbor explained, "my husband's science class hatched these Pekin ducks from eggs as a school project a month ago. 
He brought two home for our six-year-old daughter, and they'd learned to swim in the bathtub, diving for guppies and goldfish. 
But this afternoon one of them, Funny, fell off the deck and died on the fire escape next door. 
My Jamaican neighbors didn't know there was a dead duck out there 'til I went over. 
The girl said, 'That duck's going to fly away. 
You just have to fix its wings.' But what was broken was its neck. 
I feel like a murderer and my daughter is very upset and -- could we bury our dead duck in your garden? 
Right now? 
I remember you said you had buried your dog there." 

   I recalled one day on the street having told this neighbor, who was musing about a final resting place for the elderly family dog, that four years ago, on a crisply beautiful spring day, my golden retriever, Thurber, had been put to sleep out back beside the blue columbine patch and that the kindly veterinarian had allowed Thurber to stay in the garden. 
"It's not legal," he had said, "but if you'll promise to give him a good Jewish burial -- before sundown today -- O.K." 
The six-year-old girl next door, who'd been questioning my gardening all along and had observed Thurber's passing through the chain-link-and-wisteria fence, thought things over for a few days and then asked: "If you water Thurber, will he turn into a plant?" (Thurber turned into a white birch, Betula papyrifera). 

   There was room for the duck between the white birch and a non-running bamboo, Sinarundinaria nitida, recently arrived from California. 
However, since my garden is intensely densely planted and by 10 p.m. visibility is low even with fireflies and the all-night burglar light of the people over the back fence, I proposed burial in the a.m. 
All the same, I wondered if it had occurred to my neighbor to ask her landlord, resident downstairs, if she might bury the duck in his all-ivy Skinner Boxstyle yard? 
Yes, the thought had occurred, but her landlord had AIDS and despite AZT had been hospitalized several times already. 
"I can't ask him about burying a dead duck -- or even talk to him about anything to do with death." (And besides, the man hated flowers.) 

   Well, had she thought of asking the woman two houses down, who likes flowers and is a gardener? 
"I'm sure she'd freak out. 
Her garden is very orderly, very tidy, it has a lawn . . . 
I just wouldn't feel comfortable asking to disrupt that garden to bury a duck." 
Which is why my garden had come to mind. 
Not only was there already a golden retriever in it but, my neighbor observed, "your garden is so wild." 

   A little after 8 the next morning she crossed the street carrying a shoebox with the deceased duck and a bag of lime borrowed from the gardener with the ruly garden. 
Funny was interred midway between the Thurber birch and the new bamboo. 
We covered the downy yellow duckling with a sprinkling of lime and a pickup potpourri of rose petals (Gloire des Mousseux, Jacques Cartier, Climbing Cecile Brunner, Golden Showers), the last fantastical black and blue parrot tulips, foxglove bugles, catalpa bells, bleeding heart lockets and clematis. 

   A while later my neighbor's daughter came to pay her last respects and lay the duck's tombstone. 
She had painted a sizable rock, found on the street, in dabs of red, white, yellow, blue and green, and written FUNNY in red topside. 
As she floated more flower petals over the grave, the little girl said goodbye to the duck. 
Her mother said, "Funny would like this place. 
I'm sure Funny will be happy in this garden." 
Funny lies very near the compost pile where, earlier in the season, I had informally recycled a ruby-crowned kinglet and two warblers that my cat, Be-bop, had downed along the Eastern Flyway, of which my garden is a very small stretch. 

   With the memorial service concluded, I got on with the planting: two houttuynias, a Phuopsis stylosa, a Cynoglossum nervosum, coreopsis "Goldfink," hemerocallis "Good Fairy of Oz" and so forth, but all afternoon I kept returning to my childhood garden. 
Growing up in the woods across Lake Washington from Seattle, my sister, brother and I each had a vegetable and a flower garden to tend, and a surfeit of pets. 
My flower garden, a fairly shady place, was also the family pet cemetery. 

   There rested Tweetie, the canary the cat caught on the bird's solo flight through the house; Pete the hamster -- instead of breeding, the night I left them together, Repeat killed Pete; three bunnies -- I was a notably unsuccessful rabbit breeder -- when Mopsy, my white rabbit, finally gave birth, she also committed infanticide; the Muscovy ducks, GusGus and Waddles, brought down by a neighbor's boxer, who later got Mammy and Pappy, the Bantam couple. 
Whenever a pet died I would put the body in a Sunny Jim peanut butter jar, insert a scrap of paper with the animal's name printed for posterity, and twist the lid tight, so as to preserve my pet intact, for later exhumation. 
I would bury the glass peanut butter coffin in my funerary flower garden and mark the spot with a small twig cross. 
Each turtle, hamster, guppy, canary, etc. would be sent to R.I.P. according to modified Catholic rites, based on the old Baltimore Catechism. 

   So Funny, the Pekin duck, lies between Thurber, the birch, and the Chinese stationary bamboo, and has made me remember that my garden has always included dead pets, and most likely always will. 
One way or another -- even in New York City -- animals find their way into my garden. 
I water them and they come up roses. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
