ID: 320	RANK: 55	SCORE: 7.669358
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880307-0028 </DOCNO>
<HL> Campaign '88: Robertson, a Man of Unusual Economic Views, Expounds on Compound Interest, Disdains Fed </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alan Murray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   The Nashville Rotarians were expecting garden-variety political rhetoric. 
But instead, presidential candidate Pat Robertson treated them to an extraordinary lunch speech about how compound interest enables central bankers to control the world. 

   "It was certainly unusual," Rotary President Robert Street says. 
"I thought he sounded to the right of Attila the Hun." 

   The Rotarians aren't the only ones to be surprised. 
Mr. Robertson, who remains a factor in Republican politics despite his disappointing third-place finish in Saturday's South Carolina primary, embraces unusual economic views. 
He eschews both Keynesian and supply-side economics, opting instead for a neo-populist agenda that includes forcing banks to write off debts and abolishing the Federal Reserve Board. 

   Many of Mr. Robertson's economic ideas were publicized in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when he wrote a newsletter on political and economic trends called "Pat Robertson's Perspective." 
Today, he avoids the religious imagery of those earlier days. 
But in a recent interview with The Wall Street Journal, he made it clear that his views are remarkably unchanged. 

   In 1981, for instance, Mr. Robertson wrote that accumulating debt would soon cause an economic downturn, followed by "hyperinflation, followed by a final collapse, then the rebuilding of a new world for a brief period according to Satan's design, then permanently according to God's design." 

   In the interview, he said the downturn he forecast in 1981 has only been postponed. 
"I thought the economy would begin to tail over in 1982," he said, speaking by phone from an airplane over Florida. 
"But the enormous Keynesian stimulus (of huge budget deficits) postponed the date, I think to 1989." 

   Mr. Robertson also continues to believe that debt is the central villain in the world's economic ills. 
In the interview, he acknowledged that he still favors adopting a "year of the jubilee," in which all public and private debts would be canceled every 50 years. 
"It's serious," he said of the proposal. 
"If we wrote it into the Constitution, it would keep us out of the problems we now have." 

   At the center of Mr. Robertson's economic thinking lies a fascination with compound interest. 
In his newsletter, he said that "if 30 pieces of silver given to Judas Iscariot had been invested tax-free at 4% interest continually compounded until now, it would amount to a sum so vast that it could provide $300,000 to every man, woman and child in the world." 

   He made a similar point in his Nashville Rotary speech in January, noting that "Baron Rothschild said compound interest was the eighth wonder of the world." 

   The compounding of interest, Mr. Robertson argues, causes debt to build up to a level "no individual and no corporation can stand." 
The result is an economic cycle of about 50 years, in which debt accumulates until it becomes overwhelming, and then is eliminated, either through hyperinflation or depression. 

   In his newsletter, Mr. Robertson cited Old Testament accounts of a 49-year economic cycle followed by a year of "jubilee" as a source for his ideas. 
Today, he is more likely to cite the Russian economist Nicolai Kondratieff, who observed large economic cycles of about 50 years in Western society. 

   Mr. Robertson believes we are at the end of one of those cycles. 
As president, he would try to minimize the damage by managing the liquidation of debts. 
He says, for instance, that he would require banks to write down their loans to troubled Third World countries or to struggling farmers. 

   Along with Mr. Robertson's fascination with compound interest goes a disdain for central banks. 
In 1981, Mr. Robertson accused the Federal Reserve of printing money and lending it to the Treasury at prevailing interest rates. 
"A more monstrous theft of public funds has seldom been imagined," he wrote. (The newsletter failed to mention that all Fed profits are returned to the Treasury at the end of each year.) 

   In the interview last week, Mr. Robertson echoed his earlier criticisms. 
"If you go back to 1913 when (the Fed) was established and draw a chart from then to now, you find the increase in debt goes up almost steadily, except during recessions," he said. 
"In many of their policies, they work counter to the best interests of the nation." 

   Mr. Robertson also contended in the interview that the Fed is unconstitutional -- a claim that has been rejected by the federal courts. 
And he repeated suggestions, made frequently in his earlier newsletters, that Fed policy is influenced by international bankers, the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission, a group dedicated to improving relations between Western Europe, Japan and the U.S. 

   Similar views have long circulated among some groups outside the political mainstream. 
"They are the standard touchstones of far-right economic theory," says Daniel Levitas, research director for Prairiefire, a rural-oriented group that monitors organizations ranging from the revived Populist Party to the Posse Comitatus, a radical anti-tax group. 
But Mr. Robertson is bringing the ideas to a new position of prominence. 

   The former television evangelist calls himself a "free-market" economist, who has read and admires the views of the prominent Austrian economists Ludwig von Mises and Friederick von Hayek. 
He fervently rejects supply-side economics, saying that "some of the foolishness in the editorial pages of The Wall Street Journal is nonsense. 
You can't cut taxes without cutting spending." 

   Nevertheless, Mr. Robertson backs a host of costly new tax breaks, such as a deduction for corporate dividend payments, an increase in the personal exemption for dependent children to $5,000 from $2,000, an expansion of individual retirement accounts and Keogh plans, an expansion of write-offs for research and development, expanded write-offs for business investment, and more -- proposals which together could cost the Treasury as much as $100 billion a year in lost revenue, according to congressional and Treasury figures. 

   How would he pay for this largesse? 
"It costs us $150 billion a year to defend Western Europe and Japan. 
Check my figures. 
It's approximately that," Mr. Robertson says, citing a number that is half the entire Pentagon budget. 
"The time has come to give them a bill. 
I don't know whether we can get the full amount, but we can get a substantial amount." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
