ID: 320	RANK: 75	SCORE: 7.143301
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870505-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Justices Rule That States May Require
Private, All-Male Clubs to Admit Women
---
By Stephen Wermiel
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> BT TAXES HCA
PUBLISHING (PUB)
BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
SUPREME COURT (SUP)
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Supreme Court ruled unanimously that states may require private, male-only public service clubs to admit women as members. 

   By a 7-0 vote, the justices upheld a decision by a California state court barring Rotary International from ousting a local Rotary Club that decided to admit women. 

   Rotary International argued in California courts and in the Supreme Court that its policy of accepting only men as members was protected by the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of association. 

   The Supreme Court, rejecting the argument, said in an opinion written by Justice Lewis Powell that "the relationship among Rotary Club members is not the kind of intimate or private relation that warrants constitutional protection." 

   The decision will force Rotary Clubs and other similar male-only organizations such as the Kiwanis Club and Lions Clubs to review, and possibly change, their membership policies in some places. 
But because the case involved California civil rights law, the impact may be limited to those states with similar laws. 

   Ten states filed a friend-of-the-court brief in support of applying California's law against the exclusion of women from Rotary Clubs. 
The states were Minnesota, Connecticut, Illinois, Louisiana, New Jersey, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, Utah and Wisconsin. 

   Moreover, Carol Agate, a Los Angeles lawyer who defended the decision of the Rotary Club of Duarte to admit women, estimated that "at least half the states have similar laws." 

   Besides having a varying effect geographically, the high court ruling is limited in another important way. 
The court said the Rotary Clubs' membership policy isn't entitled to constitutional protection because the clubs conduct their business in a relatively public setting, and many local chapters have large, fluctuating memberships. 

   But the justices said in a footnote that they were expressing no opinion about the First Amendment rights of members "in the many clubs and other entities with selective membership that are found throughout the country." 
That appears to leave open the legality under state civil rights laws of private, men-only lunch and social clubs that still occupy a prominent place in the business structure of many cities. 

   Ms. Agate, who handled the Rotary case for the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation of Southern California, said, "It's a continuum. 
On one end is the Monday night poker game; on the other end is the large public service group. 
We don't know where the Supreme Court will draw the line." 
She added, "Nobody wants to break down the poker game." 

   The court's opinion said the First Amendment protects individuals' freedom to associate in intimate or private relationships, or to associate for the expression of common interests. 
But the court said Rotary Clubs don't fall into either category. 

   "By opening membership to leading business and professional women in the community, Rotary Clubs are likely to obtain a more representative cross-section of community leaders with a broadened capacity for service," Justice Powell wrote. 

   The decision closely resembled a 1984 Supreme Court ruling in which the high court upheld Minnesota officials' interpretation of their civil rights law to require the all-male Jaycees to admit women. 

   But the Rotary Clubs' membership requirements are somewhat more selective than for the Jaycees, and lawyers for the Rotary International and other groups argued that this increased selectivity entitled members to greater constitutional protection. 

   Justice Antonin Scalia didn't join the court's opinion, but said without further explanation that he concurred in the judgment upholding the ruling of the California Court of Appeals. 

   Justices Harry Blackmun and Sandra O'Connor didn't participate in the case. 
A Supreme Court spokeswoman said Justice Blackmun and Justice O'Connor's husband, John, both are honorary members of Rotary Clubs. 

   Obscenity Standards
   The justices ruled that an important part of the legal test for whether something is obscene should be based on an objective, national standard, rather than on varied, local community values. 
The decision is likely to make obscenity prosecutions less subject to the whims of local prosecutors or local anti-pornography groups. 

   By a 6-3 vote, the high court said the question of whether particular material "lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value" should be based on an objective, national standard upon which reasonable people would agree, not on local community values. 

   In a 1973 ruling, the Supreme Court said that a three-part test should be used in determining whether something is obscene. 
The first two parts, based on community standards, are whether the material appeals to prurient interests and whether it depicts sex in a patently offensive way. 
The third part addresses whether the material lacks the literary-value standard. 
But in yesterday's decison, written by Justice Byron White, the high court said community standards don't control the third part of the test. 

   But the majority refused, by a 5-4 vote, to throw out the convictions of two magazine sellers in Rockford, Ill. 
Instead, the high court said the Illinois courts should decide whether the mistaken standard used by the jury was a "harmless error" that wouldn't change the outcome of the trial. 

   Justice Blackmun agreed with the court on the value standard, but objected to the suggestion that the Illinois court's decision may have involved harmless error. 

   Justices William Brennan, John Stevens and Thurgood Marshall dissented, saying the First Amendment prohibits states from prosecuting magazine dealers for selling allegedly obscene material to consenting adults. 

   New York City Bank Tax
   The justices refused to hear an appeal by Bankers Trust New York Corp. challenging the application of New York City's bank tax; the city applies the tax to interest earned on Treasury bills and other federal obligations. 

   Federal banking law prohibits state and local governments from taxing Treasury bills and notes, but allows franchise taxes or other taxes that aren't based on property values. 

   Many state and local governments have passed different types of bank taxes that have led to court tests. 
New York's financial corporation tax is based on a percentage of a bank's net income. 

   In the Bankers Trust case, the company said it earned $26.04 million in interest on federal notes and obligations for the 1977 tax year and paid $3.6 million in interest on that sum. 

   The bank argued that it was a property-oriented tax. 
But New York said the tax is for the cost of doing business and resembles a franchise tax. 
New York state courts upheld the tax. 

   The tax revenues involved in the dispute are substantial. 
Bankers Trust said the 10 largest bank-holding companies in New York alone held some $14 billion in federal obligations at the end of 1985, with the interest being taxed by New York. 

   Hospital Merger
   The Supreme Court also refused to hear Hospital Corp. of America's challenge to a Federal Trade Commission order requiring the company to divest itself of two Chattanooga, Tenn., hospitals acquired as part of a corporate takeover. 

   The case involves the acquisition of Hospital Affiliates International Inc. and Health Care Corp. in 1981. 
The transactions were completed after the Justice Department cleared the first purchase and the Federal Trade Commission cleared the second. 
But in 1982, the FTC issued a complaint alleging that the transactions violated federal antitrust law by reducing competition for hospital services in the Chattanooga area. 

   In October 1985, the FTC ordered Hospital Corp. to divest itself of two hospitals owned by the two acquired companies, to discontinue a management contract with another hospital, and to notify the commission before future acquisitions. 
A federal appeals court in Chicago upheld the FTC order last December. 

   A spokesman for Hospital Corp. in Nashville, Tenn., said the company has delayed the divestitures while awaiting the outcome of its court appeals, and has one year to comply. 
The spokesman said the company "will look at every reasonable option" in complying. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
