ID: 320	RANK: 86	SCORE: 7.007675
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880217-0106 </DOCNO>
<HL> FORM + FUNCTION </HL>
<AUTHOR> Stephen MacDonald </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
      Students' Bobsled
   Heads for the Gold
   KEEP YOUR EYE on the bobsled that the U.S. two-man team will be piloting in the Winter Olympics in Calgary this weekend. 
It was designed by students at Ohio State University in Columbus. 

   According to Attila Bruckner, assistant professor of industrial design, the project began as a classroom exercise more than a year ago. 
The students studied Olympic rules, interviewed drivers and surveyed existing sleds. 
They then designed and built 25 scale models and tested them in a wind tunnel. 

   Ordinarily, that would have been the end of it, but the students liked the results so much that they couldn't stop. 
They were determined to build a sled and get an Olympic driver to try it. 

   Lots of people and companies helped, including Du Pont Co., which provided the sled's Kevlar skin; Cytemp Specialty Steel Co., Titusville, Pa., which fabricated the alloy runners, and Richardson/Smith, a design firm in Worthington, Ohio, where the sled was assembled. 

   Brent Rushlaw, the leading U.S. driver, has agreed to use the sled this Saturday and Sunday in Calgary. 
He may also use a stock Italian sled on some runs. 

   Mr. Bruckner believes the student sled may well be faster than the "state of the art" Italian model. 
The OSU sled's No. 1 advantage, he says, is an aerodynamic shape that reduces drag 20% to 25%. 
"When you stand near the chute, you can hear the difference," he says. 
"Most sleds whistle -- a sound generated by turbulence. 
Ours is much quieter." 

   In fact, he says the students thought up several other improvements that they didn't include. 
"Success in bobsled racing is 50% equipment and 50% crew performance. 
We didn't want to burden the crew with a totally unfamiliar machine. 
Our sled combines innovation and tradition." 

   This Play Begins
   Out on the Street
   BROADWAY'S NEW hit, "The Phantom of the Opera," takes place in the dim recesses of a 19th century Paris opera house. 
The dark, ominous set deliberately blurs the line between audience and stage; for instance, the proscenium has been moved forward to embrace several rows of balcony seats. 

   But the line between inside and outside the theater has also been blurred. 
Even while the audience is on the sidewalk, it begins to feel the opera's portentous mood. 

   For this production, the entire facade of the Majestic Theatre has been painted matte black. 
The marquee is sheathed in old-fashioned stamped metal -- the kind ceilings used to be made of -- also black. 
Atop the marquee, four large copper gaslights emit an eerie blue glow. 
Three 19th century-style lampposts line the curb, each carrying three lanterns with flickering red lights. 

   "The effect is creepy," says Tama Starr, vice president of Artkraft Strauss Sign Corp., a New York marquee and sign company that designed and executed the outdoor touches to resemble the design of the play's original theater, in London. 
She adds that this kind of adornment has been popular in England "and now it seems to be catching on here." 

   Business Cards
   Do Double Duty
   MORE THAN 30 million business cards are exchanged each business day, according to Robert G. Merrick, a Sunnyvale, Calif., businessman, inventor and president of Merrick Industries. 

   That's a generous estimate. 
But whatever the number, it's probably safe to say that most of them are soon thrown away, perhaps after their contents have been copied elsewhere. 

   Mr. Merrick found that wasteful, so he used to trim cards he was given and stick them on a blank rotary-file card. 
When that became tiresome, he invented Exec-U-Punch, a small plastic device that chops two holes in the edge of a card. 
This allows the card itself to fit on the tracks of a rotary file. 

   The punch is made of fiberglass-reinforced plastic. 
"The tricky part of this was developing a mold that would produce edges that can punch cleanly and are durable," says Mr. Merrick. 

   One problem: Sometimes the punched holes obliterate important information on the card. 
Mr. Merrick's response: "It's still easier to copy a phone number on some other part of the card than it is to recopy the whole thing," he says. 

   But he's also encouraging business-card designers to leave a blank space where the holes go. 

   Funding Vote Near
   For Mega-Museum
   AMBITIOUS PLANS to put a gargantuan art museum in a tiny northwestern Massachusetts town could clear an important hurdle this month. 

   The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art and Architecture, or Mass MoCA, would occupy a 13-acre factory site in North Adams. 
Sprague Technologies Inc., based in Greenwich, Conn., has agreed to provide the 26-building facility, which it closed last year. 
The Massachusetts Legislature is soon expected to vote on final approval of a $35 million grant for the project. 

   But that would be just the first step in bringing the project to reality. 
The balance of the $74 million development budget must be raised from federal, foundation, corporate and individual grants and from private developers. 
A 1991 opening is envisioned. 

   One-third of the complex would be commercial, leaving more than 350,000 square feet for exhibition space. 
By comparison, the Whitney Museum in New York has 26,700 square feet of galleries. 
One entire building would be devoted to architecture. 

   Williams College Museum of Art will manage Mass MoCA. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
