ID: 199	RANK: 97	SCORE: 5.545546
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870828-0053 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Rodeo Days at the Old College Corral
---
By Ruth Rudner</HL>
<DD> 08/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   A hundred cowboys and cowgirls race their horses into the arena, the riders forward in their saddles urging the horses faster, circling the arena on the run before forming two parallel lines that stretch from one end of the space to the other. 
The riders, representing the 11 regions of the National Intercollegiate Rodeo Association, lift their hats to the audience and 5,000 people applaud. 
The lights dim. 
Miss College Rodeo enters carrying the American flag. 
Wearing a red, white and blue sequined shirt, her blond curls cascading out from under her cowboy hat, she circles the darkened arena in a spotlight as "The Star-Spangled Banner" is sung by a cowboy from Missoula. 
She smiles into the audience, her smile immediate and warm. 
In that moment, whoever you are, you are an American, a westerner, a cowboy bred on the vast Montana plains. 
Whoever you are, you fall in love. 

   There is no way not to fall in love with them all, all these cowgirls and cowboys competing in college rodeo. 
Young and earnest and gutsy, many have been rodeoing since they were small children. 
These, the ones who make it to the College National Finals Rodeo, are the ones ready to win. 

   For 18 of the past 19 years, the CNFR, the ultimate college rodeo, has been held here. 
Four thousand yards of dirt are laid over the basketball floor of Montana State University's Brick Breeden Field House, and a huge corral is set up outside the field house doors. 
From the more than 100 member colleges and universities comprising the NIRA, only the top two competitors in each event from each of the 11 regions make it to the CNFR. 

   Rodeo is unique among college athletics. 
Its events stem directly from the daily chores of the working cowboy, rather than from sport, and most competitors grow up on ranches. 
MSU barrel racer Amber Mapston, a former Miss College Rodeo whose father and two brothers also rodeo, says "all we ever did was chase cows and rodeo." 

   Rodeo is the only college sport with a co-ed event. 
While team roping usually consists of two men, male-female teams are not infrequent. 
One person must rope a steer's back legs and the other get a rope around its horns or neck, or one horn and the neck. 
Longtime rodeo announcer Zeb Bell seems to relish this event especially when the team consists of a boyfriend and girlfriend. 
With him at the mike, if the girl throws her rope accurately, the guy had better not miss. 

   Because rodeo is governed by the NIRA rather than the NCAA, there are no sanctions against competing in professional rodeo. 
Given the expense of rodeo, the only way most competitors can afford to compete on the college circuit is to win prize money offered at pro rodeos. 
While most students go to college with their clothes, stereos and computers, the rodeo kids pack up a mini-ranch, taking at least one, and usually more, horses, as well as calves and goats to practice roping and tying; trailers to haul the stock; a pickup truck to haul the trailer. 
They must then find housing for their animals as well as themselves. 
This is not the cheapest way to go to college. 

   Nor is it one that leaves much free time. 
Besides studying and rodeo practice, they have to tend their stock: feeding and watering twice a day, grooming, training, and riding daily. 

   Stacey Waldhauser, second in the nation in goat tying for two years running and a member of the MSU '86 women's national championship team, should have been going after the national title in goat tying this year. 
Instead, a knee injury kept her out of competition. 
Probably the most aggressive competitor on the MSU team, she called the injury, "the hardest thing I've ever had to accept. 
I was the only one from last year's (CNFR winning) team left, and when I got hurt this year it seemed like everybody else got hurt too. 
Last year was so competitive. 
Somebody would go out and do great in goat tying and the next five girls would do great. 
This year it's really slacked off." 

   Goat tying, a race against the clock, is one of the most athletic of the women's events, requiring the woman to jump off a running horse (carrying the rope in her mouth with its end in her back pocket), run to the goat, throw it to the ground and tie three legs as quickly as possible. 
Waldhauser thinks she wins on her aggressiveness. 
"I don't think I tie well enough to have won as much as I have, but I'm a lot more aggressive than 95% of the girls. 
I've learned a lot from watching calf ropers. 
If a girl gets off her horse like the calf ropers in the men's competition, she's doing it right." 

   With Waldhauser off the team, the MSU women didn't make the top 10 in this year's competition, although it had a moment of glory when Lisa Crowley, a team veteran who had not earned a spot at the CNFR before, won the second go-round of breakaway roping. 
In this event, the girl must get her loop over the calf's head as it runs twisting and turning from the moment it leaves the chute. 
Her rope, tied to the saddle horn with a breakable string, has a handkerchief attached to its end so it can be seen easily when it breaks away from the saddle horn, signaling time. 

   I went to watch Lisa practice two weeks before the CNFR, only to find the practice cancelled because her breakaway horse had injured himself. 
This is probably the only college sport where an injury to the "equipment" can have as dire consequences as an injury to the competitor. 
Yet two weeks later, she netted a spot in the event's top 20 in spite of a poor first goround. 
"After the first go I felt I had nothing to lose," she said. 
"The pressure was off. 
I was ready to win." 

   Rodeo's glamour event is barrel racing. 
It's hard to beat the effect of a pretty girl on a fast horse. 
But the contest is a real one, and the girls are determined athletes. 
Spurring the horse to a running start, the girl enters the arena fast, running a cloverleaf around three barrels set up in a triangle at the two sides and far end of the arena. 
A knocked over barrel costs five seconds, yet the rider must come close to make time. 
Rounding the barrel, the horse forms so extreme an angle that the rider's inside boot almost touches the ground. 
You wonder how the horse gets back to vertical. 
Past the third barrel, the girl races down the straightaway, so far forward she is virtually standing out of the saddle, urging the horse faster, faster, until, past the timers, she pulls up short, just before the arena wall, so short it seems miraculous she stays in the saddle. 

   You want her to win. 
You want each of them to win. 
You want that kind of daring and focus to pay off. 
"How 'bout a hand for that little cowgirl!" 
Zeb Bell says over his microphone, yet you know without question she is not just some little cowgirl but that wildfire spirit of the West that makes it easy to believe in all the old, strong, necessary myths. 

   ---
   Ms. Rudner is an outdoor writer based in Bozeman. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
