ID: 159	RANK: 29	SCORE: 8.074965
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870310-0110 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor:
Surrogate Surnames</HL>
<DD> 03/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Staff reporter Rifka Rosenwein in an entertaining but informative article on making up new surnames for children (page one, Feb. 11) says that it is giving genealogists trouble in sorting out the family tree. 
But will it help reduce conflict for the child? 

   At one time a family was like a ship: They all sailed under one banner. 
Today, many women use their own family name and in the case of divorce and a reconstituted family, there may be found as many surnames as there are people in the household. 
The wife may be using her father's name rather than that of her first or second husband, while the children of her earlier marriage are using their natural father's surname. 

   Courts that have considered whether a mother may change the surname of minor children to that of her second husband have granted a change of name only when "the substantial welfare" of the child requires it. 
Generally, minor embarrassment or emotional upset has been held insufficient to require a change of name. 
The courts try to maintain and encourage continuing parental relationship. 
"A change of name could further weaken, if not sever, such a bond," said the Minnesota Supreme Court. 
In a Nebraska case, a psychologist testified that the children were in need of a stable home situation and identity, and it would be detrimental to their personality growth and development for them to be called by a name other than that of the second husband. 
A psychiatrist testified it would be in the best interests of the children that their legal name be made that of the second husband because the children considered they were a part of this new family, and to be called by some other name would suggest they weren't part of it. 
The court refused to grant a change of name, considering that the father was paying child support and had exercised visitation rights. 

   An innovative surname may avoid the conflict. 

   Prof. Ralph Slovenko
   Wayne State University
   Detroit
   ---
   I was so enchanted by your article on the new trend in surnames that I immediately phoned my friend John Pogett and his wife, nee Ann Hodgdon, that their soon-to-be-born child absolutely must be named Hodge-Podge. 
I wrote my niece, Lucinda Mix, wife of Freddy Upjohn, that it was imperative that her first child be surnamed Mixed-Up. 
And getting carried away, I insisted to my neighbor Samantha Headley, married to Joel Airman, that she must seriously consider the name Air-Head for one of their progeny. 

   I'll grant that these names don't have the sheer majesty of Roth-Tubman or the poetry of Jebef -- names cited in your story -- but I think they're beautiful just the same. 

   D.B. Allen
   West Chester, Pa.
   ---
   Children whose surnames differ from those of their parents have some explaining to do, but only when people are acquainted with the names of both parent and child. 
A lot more explaining is needed, however, by those who were given first names that, in combination with their last names (and without regard to the names of their parents), cause confusion, consternation and even comic relief. 
Among those who, as helpless infants, were not consulted on the issue but who can now attest to the challenges presented by the individuality and creativity of certain parents is . . . 

   Michael L. Michael
   New York
</TEXT>
</DOC>
