ID: 159	RANK: 39	SCORE: 7.944492
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881014-0194 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Helping Children Adjust to Divorce </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   I read with interest your article "Kids Are Often Losers in Joint Custody" (second front page, Sept. 22). 
As director of the Children of Separation and Divorce Project at the Family Life Center Inc. (a private, nonprofit, community mental-health center), my staff and I have facilitated more than 60 therapeutic/support groups for children and youths ages eight to 19. 
As part of our clinical services, we work with all significant adults in the child's life -- both parents (custodial and non-custodial), teachers, other therapists, grandparents, etc. 

   Basically, we are in agreement with the points Clare Ansberry makes in her article. 
Joint custody is one alternative in helping the child adjust to divorce in healthy ways. 
The recent passage of a bill in California repealed the emphasis joint custody had previously been given. 
Joint custody works well when two parents clearly can maintain a businesslike parenting relationship with the needs of their child superseding their own. 
Other factors include the child's personality, his relationship with each parent, his age and feelings about his living situation. 

   Our staff has one suggestion for both parents prior even to a mutual separation. 
Find out what children experience when their parents separate and how parents can help the children to adjust. 
For the past two years, we have combined forces with lawyers, divorce mediators, judges, child-support personnel, financial planners, career planners and family therapists to provide couples recently separated or contemplating separation the opportunity to find out the impact of their decision in many different areas and what they can do to help their children. 
Children who have been through a divorce volunteer to speak to this group of parents to share their feelings and discuss how they coped. 

   We strongly urge parents to locate similar helping resources before they are in the middle of their own personal turmoil so that they can make thoughtful, healthy decisions for their children and themselves. 

   Risa Garon
   Director, Children of Separation and Divorce Project
   Family Life Center Inc. 

   Columbia, Md.
   ---
   Regarding your article on joint custody, there is a mountain of research that shows two parents are generally better than one for healthy child development. 

   More than 20 independent researchers and prominent mental-health professionals show the benefits of co-parenting. 
These researchers focus on the majority of children -- the norm -- not on isolated cases of continuously litigating parents, as Judith Wallerstein has done in her apparent attempt to prop up sole maternal custody. 

   It is interesting that despite 60 years of sole maternal custody, there is not one study that shows it is generally good for kids to have only one parent. 
Even with continuously litigating parents, the worst thing one can do is create a "parentectomy," the removal of one parent from the life of the child, according to Dr. Frank S. Williams, director of Family and Child Psychiatry at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. 

   In research presented to the American Bar Association Family Law Section in 1987 and 1988, Dr. Williams said that parental identity -- if strengthened in both parents -- can increase cooperation, and that there should be a rebuttable presumption for joint custody in this country. 

   Children need their fathers as well as their mothers. 
Public policy should reflect this basic and powerful need. 

   David L. Levy
   President, National Council for Children's Rights
   Washington
   ---
   There is voluminous evidence of the harm sole custody does to the children of divorce and the promise that joint custody holds for them. 

   When children are placed in day care, they must put up with back-and-forth transport to their day-care centers and conform to the regimen of their care givers. 
Some children do not take well to day care. 
Is this an argument for abolishing day care for all children? 
When children go to school, they have to cope with schedules and adapt to their teachers' personalities. 
Some children are depressed by this. 
Is this a sufficient argument for doing away with elementary education? 

   Similarly, when parents divorce, their children generally will have to spend some time with each parent. 
In joint custody, children see their fathers more often than in sole custody. 
This is generally considered a good thing. 
Nevertheless, some children adjust to joint custody less well than others. 
Is the discomfiture of the few a justification for altering arrangements that work for the majority who try them? 

   Truth be told, wholesale opposition to joint custody by some "experts," though cloaked in concern for children, has other motivations: Child support is usually paid to custodial mothers. 
Some feminists, including those cited by Ms. Ansberry, fear that joint custody dilutes the claims of custodial mothers to child support and vitiates their ability to trade visitation for additional payments from fathers. 
Obviously, this calculus has nothing to do with the needs of children for the company of their fathers. 
Child support is an independent factor that should be -- and fortunately, in most jurisdictions, is -- reckoned on its own terms by the courts. 

   Sole custody is a major producer of single-parent families. 
Single-parent families are a major social problem. 
The problems of a minority of joint-custody children pale by comparison. 

   Jed H. Abraham
   Attorney at Law
   President
   Parental Rights Organization
   Evanston, Ill.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
