ID: 159	RANK: 48	SCORE: 7.680099
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881101-0086 </DOCNO>
<HL> Men, Too, Wrestle With Career-Family Stress --- Few Firms Offer Working Father Much Support </HL>
<AUTHOR> Cathy Trost (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR </CO>
<TEXT>
   Like women before them, many men are learning that being a good parent and having a demanding career are often mutually exclusive. 

   With women working outside the home in record numbers, men are feeling increased pressure to spend more time with their children and to help around the house. 
Employers, however, generally haven't made it easy for them to do so. 
The result is that today's working fathers are feeling the anxieties that have plagued working mothers for years. 

   "Stress," says Bradley Googins, an associate professor at the Boston University School of Social Work, "is becoming more equitable." 

   This may seem odd at a time when more companies are offering flexible work schedules, parental leaves, child-care help and other assistance to working parents. 
But the reality is that women are usually the primary targets, because they tend to have more responsibility for family matters. 
"When you say 'work/family,' it's a euphemism for child care and women," says Ellen Galinsky, director of family-life studies at Bank Street College of Education, a New York research group. 

   A Boston University survey of 1,600 employees at a large public utility and a big high-technology company in the Northeast found that only 11% were part of the "traditional work force" -- that is, married males with wives at home full time. 
The survey, conducted last year by Mr. Googins and Dianne Burden, who was then an associate professor at the school, also found that almost as many fathers as mothers -- 36% vs. 37% -- reported feeling "a lot of stress" in balancing their work and family lives. 

   Overall, working mothers usually lead in the stress sweepstakes. 
The Boston University survey, like others before it, found that the total time spent on combined job and family demands is "considerably greater" for women than for men. 
When asked the extent to which they felt stress in balancing work and family duties, only mothers reported "extreme stress." 

   But one specific area where men experience more stress than women is when child-care duties force them to miss work, says Marybeth Schinn, an associate professor of psychology at New York University. 
Her research shows that in such situations men are more likely to report psychological and health problems, including headaches, bad moods and dissatisfaction with their jobs or families. 

   Of course, there are still plenty of men whose careers always come first, who are too busy, indifferent or tradition-bound to share housework and child-care responsibilities. 
But for many two-career couples, "the two big issues are who's going to do the parenting and whose job is more important," says Patricia Libbey, director of Work and Family Resources, a research and consulting group in Afton, Minn. 
"One or the other question is constant: Who should work overtime? 
Who should take on more travel? 
Who should go to night school this year?" 

   Ms. Libbey's survey last year of 1,200 employees at a big Minneapolis company found that more than 70% of fathers under age 35 had serious concerns about problems they were having managing work and family conflicts with their spouses. 
Some 60% of the men said family concerns were affecting their work goals and plans, noting that they were often not seeking promotions and transfers because they needed to spend more time with their families. 

   There are companies with innovative programs, such as child-rearing leaves and parenting seminars, that reach out to fathers as well as mothers. 
For the most part, though, corporate America, buffeted by economic pressures and commanded largely by a generation of men with traditional families, hasn't made many genuine accommodations for male employees. 

   "The workplace hasn't changed significantly," says Boston University's Mr. Googins. 
"The norms are for men that 'If I assume some of this role, not only will my career be impacted but I'm going to be seen as sort of a funny guy.'" 

   Some business owners maintain that men don't want special benefits, such as long unpaid leaves after the birth of a baby, because they can't do without the money or because they feel that child rearing is largely the mother's domain. 
"Let's face it: Men don't, by and large, have the natural interest in caring for a tiny baby," contends Cynthia Grantz, president of Rockford Coatings Corp. in Rockford, Ill. 

   Ms. Grantz and other small-business owners fought strenuously to defeat an effort in Congress this year to establish a national policy on unpaid parental leaves. 
Ms. Grantz argued, among other things, that such a policy would ultimately result in paid leave, which would prove too enticing for most employees to resist. 

   "You have to give up something to have children," says Rodney Fischer, the 44-year-old president of Curlew Homes, a Florida home-building concern. 
Noting that he puts in a seven-day work week, he says he doesn't think a company should have to do such things as give leaves to fathers for childbirth. 
"If you're working for someone," he says, "you work for them." 

   Partly because of the prevalence of such attitudes, men typically aren't heavy users of parental benefits at the companies that do have them. 
For example, Commonwealth Edison Co., a Chicago-based utility whose 18,000-employee work force is 80% male, offers up to six months' unpaid leave for child-rearing, education and other purposes. 
Since 1985, 300 women and only 25 men have applied for the child-care leave. 

   More than a third of 384 big companies surveyed in 1986 by Catalyst, a New York research group, offered unpaid leave time to fathers -- but only nine of the companies reported that men took advantage of the policy. 
In fact, the group's report noted that almost two-thirds of the companies "did not consider it reasonable for men to take any parental leave whatsoever." 
Even among those with leave policies, 41% didn't sanction men using them. 
"If a man requested a leave for this purpose, his career would take a dive," a human-resources manager at a big Southern manufacturer told Catalyst interviewers. 

   Some specialists think that findings like Catalyst's are misleading, and that many men use vacation and sick days to take short amounts of time off without calling it paternity leave. 
A study last year by Joseph Pleck, who teaches family issues at Wheaton College in Norton, Mass., found that husbands in more than half of 40 families took an average of 7.5 work days off after the birth of their last child. 

   Status differences at work may also play a role. 
"Men in management and higher-paid jobs have more freedom to act in accordance with changing awareness," says James Levine, director of the Fatherhood Project at Bank Street College. 

   Despite the tensions, working fathers are finding new ways to fill their two roles. 
Most nights, Chris Kerns, a 41-year-old lawyer at the Washington, D.C., law firm McNeily &amp; Rosenfeld, picks up the youngest of his three sons from a day-care center, goes home and eats dinner with his family, and then heads back to work -- often until 2 a.m or later. 
Though his life is busy, "it feels good," he says, adding that his boys "probably get more of me." 

   While the short-term outlook for relief is bleak, researchers say, it should brighten as working parents continue to flood a tightening labor force. 
Besides, notes Bob Levey, a 43-year-old Washington Post columnist with two children, "there's a new generation coming into management." 

   ---

                   Families vs. Careers
   Percentage of young working parents with these problems:
                                 MALE     FEMALE
          Child care             72%       65%
          Dual-earner problems   70%       63%
          Sick-child care        53%       65%
          No time for spouse     35%       50%
          No time for children   31%       50%
          Financial problems     12%       44%
   Source: Work &amp; Family Resources, Afton, Minn.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
