ID: 159	RANK: 72	SCORE: 7.398035
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880823-0024 </DOCNO>
<HL> PEOPLE PATTERNS </HL>
<AUTHOR> Alan L. Otten </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> TOB </IN>
<TEXT>
      Smokers' Problems Go
   Well Beyond Smoking
   SMOKERS HAVE a good many other unhealthy habits, two recent studies have found. 
Analyzing replies from over 32,000 representative adults, the National Center for Health Statistics discovered that smokers are much heavier drinkers than nonsmokers, less active physically, far likelier to skip breakfast, and apt to get less sleep. 
The heavier the smoker, the more likely he or she is to indulge the unhealthy practices. 

   The University of Michigan's Fitness Research Center, surveying more than 4,000 employees of a large manufacturing company, uncovered still other bad habits: wider use of drugs and medications, a greater tendency to get into arguments, and such other risky behavior as carrying guns or knives, picking up hitchhikers and visiting high-crime areas. 

   Another result from Michigan: While more than half the nonsmokers regularly drove with seat belts, only one-third of the smokers did. 

   As in most smoking surveys, the results indicated higher rates of absenteeism for smokers and higher health costs to the employer. 
"But the major surprise," says Fitness Research Center Director Dee Edington, "was the connection of smoking to so many other bad habits." 


                     Nasty Habits
   A survey of people, 20 years or older, showed that smokers are more likely than nonsmokers to have other unhealthy habits
                                       SMOKING HABIT
        HEALTH                  ---------------------------
        PRACTICE                NEVER    FORMER    CURRENT
    Never eats breakfast        18.3%    19.0%     37.6%
    Heavy drinker*               7.2     11.9      20.1
    Sleeps 6 hrs. or less       20.9     20.9      25.3
    Less physically active      17.3     18.1      21.8
   *At least five drinks in 10 days or more in the past year
   Source: National Center for Health Statistics.
   Children Today Have
   Some Reason to Cheer
   THERE'S GOOD news along with the bad on the condition of kids today. So says a forthcoming Urban Institute book on the American family.
   Most reports on American children and youth paint a gloomy picture, and psychologist Nicholas Zill and demographer Carolyn Rogers agree there's ample cause for concern: increasing numbers of children in single-parent households, widespread childhood poverty, inadequate prenatal care, declining academic skills, extensive drug and alcohol use, teen suicide rates more than double those of the early 1960s.
   Yet Mr. Zill and Ms. Rogers also note several positive changes over the past quarter of a century. Fewer children per family and more widely spaced births, among blacks as well as whites, leave more family resources for each child. Across the board, today's parents are better educated, another break for the kids. Some childhood poverty has been eased by food stamps, Medicaid, and other non-cash help.
   Though high compared with other industrialized nations, U.S. infant mortality is less than half the 1960s' rate, and children's health in general has never been better. The educational achievements of minority and low-income white children have "notably improved," though they are still below those of middle-class whites, the researchers write.
   Their overall conclusion: "Child welfare is a multifaceted phenomenon, and not all recent changes in indicators of well-being have been for the worse."
   Scarcity of Help Awaits
   Aging Baby Boomers
   WHO WILL TAKE care of the baby boomers when they've grown old and need help? Spouses and children are the traditional care givers for the very old, but, notes Rand Corp. demographer Peter Morrison, elderly boomers will almost certainly have fewer of these around to help than their parents have.
   The boomers' parents averaged more than three children per family; the baby boomers are averaging well under two -- and many will have only one or none. Says Mr. Morrison: "Early next century, when baby boomers grow old, they will have few adult children to fill the role of care giver because they produced so few offspring."
   Moreover, the baby boomers' high divorce rates means that even with a substantial level of remarriage, many will enter old age without spouses -- particularly women, who continue to outlive men.
   For Fathers, Sons
   Are Still No. 1
   DESPITE SEVERAL decades of discussion of feminism and gender roles, most fathers still are far more involved in bringing up their sons than in bringing up their daughters. Drawing on a national survey of children, University of Pennsylvania sociologist S. Philip Morgan and two colleagues find convincing evidence of this continuing bias.
   Boys, for example, are far more likely than girls to have Dad as the parent setting the rules -- the size of their allowances, when they do their homework, how late they can stay out. And whereas over half the boys say their fathers frequently do fun things with them, only 30% of the daughters enjoy such a relationship.
   A companion analysis using Census Bureau data concludes that couples with at least one son are significantly less likely to separate or divorce than those having only daughters. The University of Pennsylvania team figures the risk of marital disruption to be about 9% higher if there is no son, and they say the effect seems to hold regardless of such factors as race and level of education.
   The obvious reason: Having made a greater emotional investment in their sons, fathers are readier to continue unhappy marriages for their sake.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
