ID: 159	RANK: 8	SCORE: 9.734555
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880922-0069 </DOCNO>
<HL> Children -- Coping With Change: Kids Are Often Losers in Joint Custody --- Constant Moves Between Parents Produce Strains </HL>
<AUTHOR> Clare Ansberry (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
      {Second of a Series}
   Meet the new kids on the block: two-household children. 

   Four-year-old Ryan Padwo of Baltimore lives with Dad on Mondays and Tuesdays, with Mom on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and alternates the rest of the week with each of them. 
Asked by his mother if he wants to spend more time with his father, Ryan replies: "No, Mom, I want this to be fair for each of you." 

   Seven-year-old Jessica Toplin shuttles back and forth between her separated parents four times a week. 
"I wish I could just split myself in half," the Philadelphia youngster once told them. 
And then there's Amy, a 16-year-old who alternates weeks with her divorced parents, who live 30 miles apart. 
The Baltimore-area teen-ager, tagged "bag lady" by classmates because she often totes her clothes with her to school, says she's disappointed she can't see her friends more often. 
"My life is more complex, but it's worth it to see my dad," she says. 

   Children of divorced parents used to live with Mom and see Dad every other weekend. 
But with more mothers working and many fathers seeking a greater role in parenting, custody arrangements have become more flexible, producing some children who live out of suitcases, have their own frequent-flier cards and keep personal calendars taped to two refrigerator doors. 
For them, Saturday baseball leagues or piano lessons are often out of the question since weekend schedules are just too crazy. 
It's the price they pay to be equal children to parents who have gone separate ways. 

   Psychologists and child-custody specialists agree that joint or more-flexible sole custody agreements should be beneficial in assuring children that they haven't lost either parent. 
"How could a kid be harmed because both parents want to spend a lot of time with him?" asks Lynn Gold-Bilkin, a lawyer in Philadelphia. 

   But such arrangements often work better on paper than in practice. 
Even when the divorce is amicable, the simple logistics -- deciding who takes the child to and from school, to the dentist, and on shopping trips -- are difficult enough. 
It's doubly hard when anger and bitterness linger between the couple. 

   "The question is: Can you get along better after the divorce than before?" asks Albert J. Solnit, former director of the Yale University Child Studies Center. 
He believes that since a child remains close to both parents in a shared-custody arrangement, it's especially important for them to put aside their hurt and not undermine each other's parental role. 

   "Joint-custody arrangements sound so wonderful. 
Everything is in the 'best interest of the child,'" notes Clare Robinson, a child psychologist at the Cleveland Clinic. 
But, she adds, too often the child becomes "a secondary consideration" for parents unwilling to care for kids full time or to bear the full financial burden. 

   For the child, the most direct impact of dividing time between parents is having to physically shuttle back and forth. 
"It makes me dizzy," says Michelle Black, an eight-year-old from Kingsville, Md. 
Although her mother has sole custody, she spends the school year with her mother, summers with her father, and alternate weekends at both houses. 
"Sometimes I don't know where I'm going," she says. 
"Sometimes I'm confused about whose house I'm supposed to be at." 

   Such moves are also exhausting. 
Last year, Bryce Hatch, director of pupil services at public schools in Upper St. Clair, Pa., near Pittsburgh, noticed that a few children were falling asleep Monday mornings. 
Each had flown in late Sunday night or early Monday morning from weekend visits with a parent. 
"I think the parents' problems are so great they don't realize what they're doing to the kids," he says. 

   Judith Wallerstein, a Palo Alto, Calif., divorce researcher and clinical psychologist, worries about the effect on young children who may equate the shuttling as being sent away for bad behavior. 
Donald Freidheim, a Cleveland child psychologist, recalls a six-year-old boy, who commuted every other week between Cleveland and Philadelphia. 
The boy appeared introverted and preoccupied with drawing pictures of black clouds. 
Those clouds started to disappear after the parents agreed he could stay longer with each parent. 

   Older children find the constant shifts disquieting as well. 
"I don't really feel like I have a home," says 16-year-old Laura. 
When her parents first separated, she lived with each for two weeks at a time. 
Then it was a month with each, and now she's living with her father until the Christmas holidays and then switches to her mother's. 

   "You have to be different for each parent. 
Mom is more lenient than Dad. 
So you behave differently. 
I don't have any sense of stability," says Laura, who admits to being "really depressed" at times. 

   For most two-household children, each home has a different personality and rules. 
One may use wheat bread, the other white. 
Bedtime is 8 p.m. at one house, and 9 at another. 
One young girl notes that soap operas are taboo at Dad's but OK at Mom's. 
While such differences may seem minor, they're often disquieting, specialists say. 

   Ms. Robinson, the psychologist, says that to cope, children tailor their behavior to their environment. 
Ryan Padwo's room at his mother's home is filled with stuffed animals while super heroes fill his room at his father's. 
"It's like he has two separate identities," says his mother, adding: "I'm the read-the-book parent. 
His father is the play parent." 

   Understandably, children often feel caught in the middle since each parent has a say in their upbringing. 
"When I'm at Dad's, I ask him if I can do something. 
When I go back to Mom's and tell her, she wonders, 'Why didn't you ask me?'" says one 16-year-old girl. 
She asks: "Am I supposed to call back over there every time I need to do something?" 

   Risa Garon, a social worker, says constant shuttling makes it easier for parents and children to gloss over rather than solve problems. 
"It acts like an escape valve. 
When things get rough, you can pick up and go to the other house," she says. 
"Or when you start to work things out, it's time to pack up and leave. 
The continuity isn't there." 

   Ms. Garon, who runs a support group for children of divorced parents in Columbia, Md., says that children too often get tangled up in their parents' bitterness. 
She cites a recent picnic where, even though a boy and his father were having a great time when his mother arrived at 6 p.m., she "demanded the child leave because it was 'transfer time.'" 
And she says some parents have left a child with a baby sitter or at friend's home while they traveled on business because "it's not the other parent's week." 

   Ellen and Rick Toplin opted for joint custody because they believed Jessica needed both parents. 
"I couldn't be Jessica's mother and equally Ellen couldn't be Jessica's father," says Rick. 
There were also selfish motivations. 
Both have demanding careers and, says Ellen, "neither of us wanted to let go of her." 

   They've split everything evenly, even alternating years to claim Jessica as a tax deduction. 
They bail each other out in emergencies: If Jessica gets sick at school and the parent who has Jessica can't pick her up, the other parent steps in. 
"We get along better now than when we were married," says Ellen. 

   There are annoyances, of course. 
Vacations are hard to schedule, and it's bothersome having to check with each other before doing anything -- even scheduling a teacher's meeting. 
They've also had to battle well-meaning teachers, parents and even their marriage counselor who questioned their joint-custody decision. 

   "We had to fight against the odds," says Ellen. 
"But it's worth it. 
Jessica may have lost her family, but we didn't want her losing her parents." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
