ID: 122	RANK: 31	SCORE: 10.000067
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880711-0039 </DOCNO>
<HL> SHOP TALK </HL>
<AUTHOR> William Matthewson </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> GCI CL </CO>
<IN> CMD SCR </IN>
<TEXT>
      How Is a Price Set
   For Pearls of Wisdom? 

   ONE MOTIVE often cited for Paul A. Volcker's resignation last year as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board was money: He wanted to make more -- or so pundits said. 

   Without a doubt, he is making lots more. 
It isn't known what he pulls in as chairman and partner of James D. Wolfensohn Inc., the investment-banking firm. 
But it is reliably reported that he was recently offered a fee of $150,000 for a single speech and turned the money down for another, possibly more lucrative, arrangement. 

   As Fed chairman, Mr. Volcker made $89,500 a year. 

   The speech will be delivered Oct. 13 at the official opening of Olympia &amp; York's World Financial Center in lower Manhattan. 
According to people with knowledge of the negotiations, Olympia &amp; York approached Messrs. 
Wolfensohn and Volcker about Mr. Volcker speaking at the opening, and a fee of $150,000 was originally discussed. 
But finally, these people say, it was decided among the parties concerned that Mr. Volcker's compensation would be future investment-banking business for James D. Wolfensohn Inc. from Olympia &amp; York. 

   Mr. Volcker acknowledges that he will speak on Oct. 13. 
Asked about the $150,000, he laughs and says, "I know nothing about that. 
That's gossip." 
An Olympia &amp; York spokesman, when asked about the same thing, says, "It's just gossip and rumor." 

   When asked about possible Olympia &amp; York investment-banking business for Wolfensohn, Mr. Volcker says: "We always would like to build relationships with good-quality customers." 

   The Weather Prediction
   Was Very, Very Hazy
   THE FOURTH of July forecast by the National Weather Service called for rainfall in the parched Midwest over the next six to 10 days. 

   During this summer's drought, any hint of significant rain has sparked a drop in farm futures prices. 
So on July 5, when Chicago commodity traders returned from their holiday weekend, farm-futures prices plummeted. 

   Meantime, many private forecasters were predicting dry weather. 
Charles Notis, of Freese-Notis Weather in Des Moines, Iowa, said on July 5, "Based on everything we've seen, the {National Weather Service} pattern just doesn't make sense." 

   Word of the discrepancy soon reached the Chicago Board of Trade, where a rumor began that the weather service's forecast must have been issued by a junior meteorologist filling in for a superior over the holiday. 
But prices still stayed lower for the day. 

   Says a National Weather Service spokesman: "Whoever issued the forecast was a competent meteorologist." 
Still, on July 6, the weather service issued a revised forecast calling for more dry weather in much of the Midwest. 

   Says the weather service's spokesman: "These {forecasts} aren't supposed to be gospel." 

   It Might Have Spelled
   The End of Cocoa Beach
   THE FOUNDER of Gannett Co.'s Florida Today, Allen Neuharth, recently became a guest columnist in his Florida paper. 
His topic: "Middle-of-the-night police visits amount to harassment of citizens." 

   The column was a letter sent by Mr. Neuharth on May 29 to Bob Lawton, the mayor of Cocoa Beach, Fla. 
"I am a longtime law-abiding citizen of Cocoa Beach, a heavy taxpayer and a generous supporter of public interest projects and of public employees," he wrote. 
"I am writing to object to harassment caused me at 12:30 a.m. today by the Cocoa Beach Police Department. 

   "The police dispatcher awakened me at that time with a telephone call," Mr. Neuharth wrote; the call was to request that he admit a police officer and two officers of the Sea Turtle Society to the grounds of his residence. 
He acceded, he wrote; the trio arrived; and he was told they were there because "your lights are in violation of the Cocoa Beach code concerning sea turtles." 

   Mr. Neuharth took exception. 
"The sea turtle spokesman then . . . insisted I was a lawbreaker," he wrote. 
"The police officer sided with him." 
Then they left. 

   "I have literally helped put Cocoa Beach on the map," Mr. Neuharth wrote. 
"It would sadden me if I should now have to report that this is where the police work with self-appointed and self-anointed special interest people . . . to summon peaceful people like me from their sleep." 

   Replied the mayor in a letter: "Following lengthy review of this matter, the City Manager and Police Chief have issued clear instructions that should prevent any recurrence of the type of action to which you were subjected." 

   The town stays on the map. 

   Odds and Ends -
   TALL STORY: In a newsletter published by New York University's business school, John Phillips writes about his stint as a Colgate-Palmolive Co. intern. 
A big event was when he met Reuben Mark, Colgate's chairman, president and chief executive officer, whom Mr. Phillips describes as having "a commanding presence that belied his short stature." 
Mr. Phillips continues: "'You know, John,' the bald CEO remarked as he glanced at my 6-foot-plus frame topped by a thick head of hair, 'career opportunities at Colgate are very limited for someone who is tall and has a lot of hair.'" 
Still, Colgate hired Mr. Phillips as an assistant product manager, and the newsletter shows a photo of Mr. Phillips and Mr. Mark; the CEO, towering over his new employee, is standing on a desk. . . . 
Spelling lessons not included: "Two exciting days that may change the way you look at business computing forever," trumpeted the ad in the Los Angeles Times. 
"Attend the Apple Business Forum and find out what a Macintosh can do for you." 
Illustrating the ad was a desk calendar open to "Wenesday," June 29, 1988. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
