ID: 122	RANK: 46	SCORE: 9.144950
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880630-0098 </DOCNO>
<HL> Soybean Futures Decline Sharply As Rains Set In --- Temporary Drought Relief Sparks Third-Steepest Drop in Key Price Index </HL>
<AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> CMD SCR </IN>
<DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A temporary break in the drought sparked the steepest one-day plunge in soybean futures prices since 1973. 

   Heavier-than-expected rains across much of the Western Farm Belt on Tuesday and yesterday, as well as forecasts for a better chance of rain for the next several days in some farm states, also deflated corn, wheat and oat futures prices for the second consecutive day. 

   The big plunge in crop prices was primarily responsible for the third-sharpest decline in the history of the Commodity Research Bureau futures price index, a closely watched inflation indicator composed of a wide range of commodities prices, including oil, metals and lumber. 

   The index closed yesterday at 260.71, down 6.49 points. 

   The drop in grain prices buoyed some cattle prices, which had fallen in recent weeks as the rising cost of livestock feed spurred ranchers to sell their cattle and glut the market. 

   The hardest-hit farm commodity was soybeans, which had skyrocketed in value in recent weeks on speculation that the three-month-old drought could slash already dwindling stockpiles. 

   At the Chicago Board of Trade, the soybean contract for July delivery plummeted 83.5 cents a bushel to $9.31 a bushel, the biggest one-day plunge since June 1973, when the price of the contract dropped more than $1.67 a bushel in one day, according to Thomas Morgan, president of Sterling Research Corp., Arlington Heights, Ill. 

   The depth of yesterday's price drop was extraordinary. 
Normally, the Board of Trade limits how much commodity prices can move daily. 
The limit on soybean futures prices, for example, is 30 cents a bushel when trading is quiet, or 45 cents a bushel when prices have been moving their daily limit, as they have this week. 

   The exception is when a contract nears its month of delivery. 
The Board of Trade then removes the price limits. 
That began yesterday on July contracts and cleared the way for the wild ride down, analysts said. 

   The across-the-board price plunge was sparked by growing dissension among meteorologists about whether the worst of the drought is over and growing speculation among traders that the big rally in some crop prices is running out of fuel. 

   Most weather forecasters as recently as Monday saw little change in the pattern that has spawned dry weather over much of the Midwest and Great Plains since the spring. 
Indeed, many continue to see no break in the drought. 
After the close of trading yesterday, the official six-to-10-day forecast by the National Weather Service called for below-normal precipitation in major growing states such as Illinois, Indiana, Ohio and the Mississippi Delta region. 

   The National Weather Service also forecast below-normal precipitation for the central and Eastern corn-growing belt for all of July. 

   However, some private meteorologists are beginning to forecast that the worst of the dry weather is passing. 
One indication was the widespread storms Tuesday and yesterday that delivered between half an inch and two inches of rain over much of the Midwest. 

   "It looks like the pattern has changed and there will be closer to normal rain for the next five to 10 days," said Joel Myers, president of Accu-Weather Inc., State College, Pa. 

   Regardless of the weather, some traders are speculating that the price of some crops will have a hard time rising much further. 
According to Richard Feltes, research director at Refco Inc., the futures price of corn earlier this week had outstripped the level reached in previous droughts. 

   What's more, a shortage of corn is less likely than in previous droughts because the stockpile of corn in the country is near record high levels. 
"In the weeks ahead we are going to see apprehension in the corn market," he said. 

   Other experts believe the big rise in grain prices is making futures contracts too volatile. 
"For the past week and a half, we've told people not to get into the grains or soybeans if they're not in already," said Catherine A. Jones, manager of the commodity department at Rauscher Pierce Refsnes Inc. in Dallas. 

   Many traders, however, expect grain prices to resume rising. 
Richard Loewy, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York, is predicting that the corn contract for December delivery could rise 20% to $4 a bushel if hot and dry weather hits during mid-July, when moisture is critical to the corn crop's ability to pollinate. 

   In addition to weather, another uncertainty surrounding corn prices in July is what farmers will do with the 1.3 billion bushels of corn that the government is releasing to them. 
The corn has been held off the market by the government as collateral for farm loans. 
Under terms of the program, farmers can repay the loans and get back their corn because cash prices in the Farm Belt have risen to the release trigger of $3.03 a bushel. 
Most farmers are expected to horde the corn in anticipation of rising prices or for fear of a livestock feed shortage. 

   Most analysts don't think the rally in soybean prices is over, if for no other reason than that stockpiles in the country are relatively low. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
