ID: 122	RANK: 57	SCORE: 8.918728
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881005-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Business Bookshelf: Facts and Figures, Movers and Shakers </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joe Queenan </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   In the preface to his 704-page "definitive reference guide to American Business -- the trends, the statistics, the people," Louis Rukeyser expresses astonishment that no one has previously compiled such an almanac. 
Usually when things have been avoided in the past -- mating elephants with mosquitoes, storing nuclear weapons in nurseries -- there's been a good reason. 
"Louis Rukeyser's Business Almanac" (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95) is no exception. 

   The reason no one has come out with a "definitive" reference guide to American business is that in the frenzied atmosphere of the 1980s, a guide to business stops being definitive five minutes after it's published. 
Nothing dates faster than a business book because trends change, statistics lose meaning, companies get liquidated, executives get the ax, and people die. 

   All of this tends to undermine what probably started out as a worthwhile undertaking: compressing all the relevant facts and figures -- plus short, punchy bios of today's movers and shakers -- into one convenient guide. 
As the author observes, it is annoying to have to ransack dozens of reference books "looking for some specific piece of information on the economic scene." 
But it's doubly annoying to turn to one's $24.95 definitive volume and then get the wrong information. 
Even if it's nicely phrased wrong information. 

   Examples? 
Well, Walter Annenberg doesn't own Triangle Publications anymore. 
Procter &amp; Gamble has been supplanted by Philip Morris as the nation's No. 1 advertiser. 
Boone Pickens has stopped scaring people. 
Berry Gordy sold Motown. 
Drexel's been served with the papers. 
Harry Hemsley is in big trouble. 
And Jackie Presser has gone to the great truckstop in the sky. 

   Clearly, many of the statistics used in the book are of less than recent vintage, some dating from 1985, some earlier. 
In the mergers and acquisitions era, that's ancient history. 

   This is not to suggest that this almanac is a total bust. 
Far from it. 
If you're looking for general, historical information, this is your baby. 
The same is true if your quarry is some snappy anecdotal irrelevancies you can toss around at a business luncheon or an interview with someone from B------s Week. 

   Thus, Mr. Rukeyser will inform you that K mart is the country's sixth-largest employer, that white men invented counterfeit wampum, and that during one session way back in 1830 only 31 shares were traded on the New York Stock Exchange. 
Of course, this record could be eclipsed any day now. 

   You'll also learn that the envelope was invented in 1820, that Alaska has the highest taxes in the U.S., that the oldest advertisement in history is an Egyptian "wanted" poster for a fugitive slave, and that the word "bureaucracy" is a Greco-French hybrid meaning "to rule from a desk." 

   Much of the material will surprise and amuse. 
Who would have guessed that only one prostitute in five is affiliated with the Mafia? 
Probably not the Cosa Nostra. 
How many people know that the world's first amusement park opened in Denmark in 1583? 
And how many people, when asked, "Who introduced deep-fried cooking to Japan?" would have answered, "The Jesuits!" 
Oh tempura, o mores. 

   All of this is diverting, stimulating and probably correct. 
But most of these facts and figures come from the static past, where the author runs no risk of being undone by new developments. 
It is when Mr. Rukeyser discusses the present that his book falls flat on its bulky face. 

   Consider the chapter on mutual funds, which Mr. Rukeyser presumably wrote before the crash, then hastily updated with some cosmetic touches. 
At the time, his feeling was that "even with the tax changes knocking out a lot of IRA money . . . the industry is expected to thrive and become more competitive over the next few years." 

   Today, the mutual fund industry is on the ropes, with sales plummeting 97% in a single year. 
This illustrates the sad truth that things can change overnight in the stock market. 
Like, say, the night of Oct. 18, 1987. 

   A better example of the book's moldy quality is the section called "The Dealmakers," in which Mr. Rukeyser gives pride of place to Mr. Pickens, followed by the leveraged buyout specialists, Kohlberg Kravis &amp; Roberts, then Saul Steinberg, and only then Carl Icahn. 

   No one making that list today would put Mr. Pickens at the top; in fact, no one making such a list last year would have put him at the top. 
Mr. Pickens has been upstaged by any number of corporate raiders: Ronald Perelman, Asher Edelman, and, obviously, Mr. Icahn. 
Heck, Coniston Partners get more ink than this guy. 
And they haven't even published a ghosted autobiography yet. 

   No, it isn't Mr. Rukeyser's fault that trends have changed, that new statistics have been published since his book went to the printer, or that Jackie Presser up and died. 
But it isn't the statisticians' fault that Mr. Rukeyser wrote the book. 
And it certainly isn't Jackie Presser's. 

   ---
   Mr. Queenan is a writer for Barron's. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
