ID: 122	RANK: 61	SCORE: 8.822021
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880714-0117 </DOCNO>
<HL> Grain Drain: As Drought Deepens, Corn Crop Is Ravaged, Hurting World Supply --- Farm Agent in Indiana Deals With Panicked Farmers; Shades of the Dust Bowl --- Anger, Then Gallows Humor </HL>
<AUTHOR> Scott Kilman and Sue Shellenbarger (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> CANDA FREST LATAM JAPAN EUROP </CO>
<IN> CMD MON </IN>
<DATELINE> BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY, Ind.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "I have never seen anything like it," says Eugene Eckrote, wading through a sickly green cornfield. 
With his boot he etches a tiny trench in the powdery soil, stirring up dust devils. 
As he wades among the stunted stalks, the crackling of their leaves breaks a silence that in another summer buzzing insects would have filled. 
But the insects have vanished. 

   If this year's drought heralds the Dust Bowl of the Eighties, Mr. Eckrote stands in the middle of it. 
As Bartholomew County's agricultural extension agent, he makes his living helping farmers. 
He can tell you, among many other things, when to plant your corn and how to rid your fields of corn borers. 
But this summer he has become a messenger of doom. 
He has seen $15 million of corn shrivel from lack of water in the past two weeks in this southern Indiana county of 65,000. 

   Last Thursday, he watched a team of Purdue University agronomists insert a thermometer into the soil on Karl Forster's farm. 
"She read 125 degrees," he later tells Mr. Forster, whose eyes widen in disbelief. 

   Never have America's farmers lost so much grain so fast. 
A critical 10-day period in which much of the $22 billion corn crop must germinate or die sterile is passing without adequate rain. 
The damage has mounted since late June, and $2 billion in potential yields has been lost each passing week, by some estimates. 
Scattered Farm Belt rains this week hardly helped, and weather forecasters yesterday predicted unusually hot and dry weather for as long as the next 30 days. 
Even if there is more rain later this month, it will come too little and too late to undo most of the harm. 

   There was also rain in 1934, the first year of the great six-year drought that created the Dust Bowl. 
But it wasn't enough, either, and "the water table kept dropping and dropping," says David Ludlum, a Princeton, N.J., weather historian. 

   The ravaged Dust Bowl left a permanent mark on America's politics and political economy, and its imagery influenced the country's folk music, literature and art. 
Far fewer Americans now than then are engaged in agriculture. 
But the nation's harvest is much larger, three times larger in the case of corn, and many more people around the world are dependent on American grains. 

   Where farmers last month were calm, many now are panicky. 
"This has the potential to be a disaster of Biblical proportions," says Paul Prentice, an economist for Farm Sector Economics Associates, a Washington consulting firm. 

   The government reported on Tuesday that 29% of the country's projected corn crop was lost. 
Some private economists believe the figure is too low. 
In the past four weeks alone, some estimate, as much as three billion bushels of corn, or 40% of the crop, may have perished. 
That is enough grain to feed Mexico's 80 million people for a year. 
Mr. Prentice says yields could easily shrink further, by 50% or more. 

   How will the country cope? 
Soybeans, the second most valuable crop, are hardier and more resilient, and may rebound -- if rains come by early August. 
Even reduced 13% by the drought, the just-ended wheat harvest was relatively large. 
It will help offset corn losses. 
U.S. corn stockpiles from previous harvests are abundant, amounting to a six-month supply. 
But none of this will keep commodities prices from rising. 
Nor will it entirely offset the damage doable or already done to corn farmers, the economies of farm states, industrial users, exporters and poor nations around the world that import food. 

   Here in Bartholomew County, the corn yield seems likely to drop 60% this year, to 46 bushels per acre, says Charles Wehmeier, head of the U.S. Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service here. 
That is the lowest since World War II. 
It would cut the county's corn output to three million bushels from 8.3 million last year. 

   The earth is so hot that the corn plants' supporting brace roots, finger-like tendrils ringing the stalk just above the ground, have curled upward like human toes arched in pain on a burning-hot parking lot. 
On a visit to a parched field, Mr. Eckrote probes for deeper feeder roots with a penknife. 
He finds that moisture from this week's rain soaked only the top inch of soil; the roots lie deep out of range, in several feet of parched dirt. 
"It's too late now," Mr. Eckrote says. 
"This field is done for." 

   The brief sex life of the corn plant makes it unusually vulnerable. 
Flowering and germination require moisture and hospitable temperatures. 
Kernels grow after the corn forms a male flower, a tassel that extends from the top of the stalk, and a female flower, the ear, nestled between a leaf and the stalk. 
The male flower showers tiny grains of pollen on the ears below. 
They catch the pollen in silks, small hollow tubes connected with each nascent kernel. 
The pollen slides down the tubes to fertilize the kernels. 

   This year, heat and dryness sapped young plants, forcing them to devote too much energy to forming roots in search of moisture. 
As a consequence, many cobs that did grow had only 14 rows of kernels instead of the usual 20. 
On other plants, there was either no flowering at all, or the silks were cooked by the dry heat. 
"We got us a lot of sterile corn," Mr. Eckrote says. 
"It's like this all over the county. 
You just don't see any ears out here." 

   Even for corn that is still fertile, Mr. Eckrote can offer farmers little help and little hope. 
Not even irrigation helps much, because 100-degree air temperatures are doing as much damage as lack of water. 
The county's fresh produce, normally irrigated and sold at roadside stands, is wilting. 
Sweet corn grown for human consumption on the Fourth of July had only 10 kernels to the ear this year. 

   Mr. Eckrote looks beyond the shelves of manuals that line his office or the regular programs on the drought that Purdue University beams to his office by closed-circuit television. 
He has sought out older farmers who can remember Dust Bowl days. 
But if they had the answers, drought wouldn't be much of a problem. 
"We're not trained to handle a drought like this," he says. 
"We have nothing to go on." 

   The pleas for help keep coming in. 
Pink telephone messages litter his desk. 
Farmers he has never heard of call him, sometimes late at night. 
"We're getting a lot of calls at home," he says. 
"The phone is growing out of my ear. 
Then we go out someplace, and all the people talk about is the drought." 

   The calls turned angry in June as the drought refused to break. 
Farmers "were getting impatient with me," he says. 
"People wanted me to do something. 
But I couldn't make it rain." 
This month, Mr. Eckrote says, many farmers have given up. 
Gallows humor has replaced the anger. 
"It's so dry, two trees were fighting over a dog," farmers joke. 

   The humor masks a growing panic. 
Farmers are mowing what corn is left to feed their cattle despite worries that the plants still harbor poisonous residues from nitrogen fertilizers. 
The social fabric is showing signs of strain. 
Mr. Eckrote worries that hard feelings will spring up between farmers with hay to sell and those with none. 
The few farmers whose pastures are in good shape are selling hay at $6 a bale. 
The usual price is $1 or so. 

   Throughout Bartholomew County, farmers are beginning to react to the crop failure in ways that will reverberate through the farm economy. 
A run is starting on seed corn because farmers are worried that seed growers are losing their fields, too. 
Many are placing their orders six months early and leaving the price open. 

   "We know we're hurt, but we don't know how badly," says a spokesman for Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc., Des Moines, the leading seed producer. 
The company intends to increase its winter seed-growing in the southern U.S. and South America. 
If corn acreage soars next year, however, as some analysts predict, seed supplies still may fall short. 

   Other businesses worry, too. 
A distillery corn-buyer in an adjacent county calls to ask Mr. Eckrote's opinion on crop damage. 
After talking to the agent, the buyer decides to snap up as much corn as he can find, even if it costs 30% more than the prevailing market price. 

   Industrial corn buyers everywhere are looking for the worst. 
Higher corn prices are already squeezing profits on production of ethanol, a fuel made from corn, according to Archer Daniels Midland Co., Decatur, Ill., the largest maker of ethanol. 
"It's not going to be a good year," says Jack Huggins, senior vice president of Pekin Energy Co., a gasohol maker in Pekin, Ill. 

   For corn refiners, who make corn syrup and other products, the sudden shrinking in supply "makes life difficult for ourselves and our customers, trying to figure out what their costs will be and what prices will be," says Patric McLaughlin, president of the corn division of American Maize Products Co. 

   The weather troubles are already spilling over into the world's grain markets. 
Trade in both wheat and corn is affected; they are often used interchangeably as livestock feed. 
An extremely poor wheat harvest in Canada, one of the world's leading exporters, has led some exporters to predict more than a 50% drop in Canadian wheat shipments this year. 
"It's a disaster up there," says one. 

   Some food-importing nations have adjusted their buying plans. 
South Korea said recently that it would reduce grain purchases from the U.S. in favor of Argentine and Australian wheat, tapioca from Southeast Asia and rapeseed and corn from Canada and Argentina. 
Japan, the U.S.'s biggest customer, has stepped up food imports sharply for fear of possible shortages and higher prices. 

   Other food-producing nations stand to reap a windfall. 
The European Community, a competing grain exporter with a relatively healthy crop so far, has cut back sharply on its sales pending the outcome of the U.S. harvest. 
Other nations, among them Brazil, Argentina and Australia, are raising their output as fast as possible. 
"The Australians are out there telling people to plant all the late wheat they can," says Andrew Bellingham of World Perspectives Inc., a Washington consultant. 

   The U.S. crop loss deals a big setback to this country's efforts to regain its share of world food trade. 
Aggressive selling last year helped lift the U.S. share of grain and soybean trade to about 48% from a recent low around 37% in 1985. 
The drought also promises to mostly wipe out the American stockpile, which has provided a cushion against world shortages and wild commodity price fluctuations. 

   The implications for poor, food-importing nations are ominous. 
The failure of the giant U.S. corn crop is lifting prices for most of all farm commodities world-wide, and the Reagan administration has proposed a slight reduction in spending under Public Law 480, the main U.S. food-aid vehicle, in the coming fiscal year. 
With world grain prices up, "there will be substantially less food shipped under that program," says an export executive. 

   Nothing happening in Bartholomew County would make Mr. Eckrote disagree. 
A farm equipment dealer in the county calls to ask whether he thinks he should hold off on ordering any new equipment for next year. 
Mr. Eckrote says he can't see how any farmer will be able to afford any. 

   Farmers' efforts to recoup have failed. 
In their withered fields, there is no dew, no trace of the rich and earthy odor that usually springs from a ripening corn crop. 
Some farmers planted soybeans amid the sharp brown stubble of their harvested winter wheat crop, but the seeds have failed to germinate. 

   In the past week, Mr. Eckrote has advised a dozen farmers to abandon their corn as worthless. 
That's all the advice he can offer. 
"By the grace of God, maybe something good will happen," he says. 
"I don't know." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
