ID: 122	RANK: 64	SCORE: 8.754220
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870513-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Weather Threatens U.S., Soviet Grain
---
Conditions May Soon
Boost Commodity Prices
---
By Jean Marie Brown and Wendy L. Wall
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST GOVMT
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Warm, dry weather in some U.S. agricultural regions and a wet spring in the Soviet Union are threatening grain crops in both countries and may push commodity prices higher in coming weeks. 

   The dry Midwestern spring, coming on the heels of an unusually mild winter, has severely depleted topsoil moisture in some areas, setting the stage for a summer drought. 
Although it is far too early in the season to make firm predictions, much of Illinois and northern Iowa -- the heart of the Corn Belt -- in the past six weeks has received less than half of the rainfall normal for this time of year. 
Most vulnerable are corn and soybeans, the nation's two most valuable crops with a combined projected value this year of more than $23 billion. 

   Meanwhile, cool temperatures and spring torrents have muddied wheat fields across the European Soviet Union, delaying spring planting as much as a month. 
The planting delays mean that the crops could be at their most vulnerable stage during the hottest part of the summer. 

   Despite mammoth grain surpluses, the weather worries in two of the world's leading agricultural nations have rekindled existing inflation fears and stirred hopes of a renaissance in sluggish East-West grain trade. 
Such speculation ignited a rally in grain and soybean prices in recent days, driving futures on both commodities to new life-of-contract highs Monday. 
That rally sparked one of the largest single-day advances ever in commodity prices, as gauged by the Commodity Research Bureau's futures index, a widely watched barometer. 

   But so far, no irreversible crop damage has been done, and most meteorologists and economists agree that it is far too early to write off either crop. 
Indeed, soybean futures prices tumbled sharply yesterday following reports that showers will dampen Iowa and Minnesota later this week. 

   "The situation can be completely corrected with one inch of rain -- one moderate storm," says Elwynn Taylor, a climatologist at Iowa State University. 
Adds Laurie Law, a Soviet analyst with E.F. Hutton &amp; Co. in Seattle: "You don't want to kill the crop before they've planted it." 

   In the Soviet Union, one of the world's largest grain importers, the severe planting delays follow one of the bitterest winters in nearly 30 years, says David Streit, a meteorologist with E.F. Hutton in New York. 
The combination could slash the nation's wheat harvest -- particularly if farmers are unable to reseed damaged winter wheat fields to spring grains. 
The cool weather is also delaying the renewed growth of winter wheat, which emerges from dormancy each spring. 

   But unusually good weather in the Siberian Newlands, a major spring wheat area, could still offset production declines in the Soviet Union's European region, Ms. Law says. 
That Siberian area, where planting delays are smaller, generally receives too little moisture; the heavy spring rains could actually boost yields there. 

   Nevertheless, in a report released late Monday, the Agriculture Department projected a Soviet grain crop of about 195 million metric tons this year -- about average by historical standards, but well below the 210 million metric tons the Soviets harvested last year. 
The department also predicted that Moscow would boost its grain imports about 20% to 36 million metric tons in the year starting July 1. 

   The forecast is stirring hopes of a resurgence in the U.S.-Soviet grain trade. 
The Soviets, traditionally one of the largest buyers of U.S. grain, had shunned U.S. wheat markets for nearly two years. 
But late last month, they accepted a U.S. offer to buy four million metric tons of subsidized wheat by Sept. 30. 
Some analysts believe Moscow may eventually buy as much as eight million metric tons, particularly if the U.S. offers additional subsidies. 
Moscow is also expected to buy at least four million metric tons of U.S. corn. 

   But so far, even the most extreme forecasts of Soviet imports from the U.S. fall short of the 1985 season's record purchases by Moscow of 18.6 million metric tons of U.S. grain. 

   The weather situation in the U.S. is less threatening. 
Despite drought fears, the dry Midwestern spring so far has done more to help than hurt U.S. corn farmers: The warm spring days have allowed farmers to get into the fields early, and corn planting is nearly completed in several major states. 
That will give the young corn plants more time to develop a good root system to help them better withstand a dry summer. 

   The sparse rainfall has prompted farmers in some areas to hold off on soybean plantings. 
However, they could wait as long as a month before crop yields are diminished, says Michael Palmerino, a meteorologist with Weather Services Inc. in Bedford, Mass. 
Meanwhile, a steady stream of light showers has eased the dryness in some areas. 
"It appears as if we're spoon-feeding the Corn Belt," Mr. Palmerino says. 

   Most meteorologists and analysts agree that the dry spell would have to extend into late June, and be accompanied by scorching temperatures, to do serious damage to the U.S. crops. 
If that happened, damage could be more extensive than normal because the mild spring drought has depleted the soil moisture that generally buffers crops. 

   But even a catastrophic drought like the one that scorched U.S. farms in 1983, the worst in 50 years, probably wouldn't match that year's weather disaster in impact. 
Even a sharp crop reduction probably wouldn't deplete U.S. corn stockpiles enough to lift grain prices to their highs of that year. 

   The U.S. currently has a nine-month supply of corn in its bins; a severe drought might halve that, driving corn futures prices to between $2.50 and $2.75 a bushel, says Richard Loewy, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. 
Although that is a 34% to 47% increase from current prices, it is just over half the levels hit in 1983 and only 9% to 20% higher than depressed year-ago prices. 

   Soybeans would be harder hit, because U.S. surpluses of that commodity are smaller. 
Mr. Loewy predicts that a severe drought would nearly deplete U.S. soybean stockpiles, driving soybean prices as high as $8.25 a bushel, a 48% increase over current levels. 

   All this would have conflicting effects on the farm economy, as it did in 1983. 
The higher prices would likely cut federal farm program costs and hand big profits to farmers with unsinged crops, says Richard Pottorff of Wharton Econometrics Inc., Bala Cynwyd, Pa. 
However, a drought would worsen the financial problems of grain farmers in hard-hit areas. 
It would also severely hurt hog and cattle raisers, who have profited in recent months from inexpensive livestock feed. 

   And whatever the impact of this year's weather, it may be fleeting. 
Despite a 50% reduction in the nation's corn crop in 1983, U.S. farmers rebounded with bumper production. 
Only two years later, U.S. corn stockpiles had returned to record levels. 

   ---

              Farm States Hit by Dry Weather
                                   RAINFALL      PERCENTAGE
 REGION                          (in inches)     OF NORMAL
 Southern Minnesota              0.18 - 1.65     10% - 43%
 Western Wisconsin               1.42 - 2.60     30% - 65%
 Southern and Central Michigan   2.17 - 2.80     50% - 70%
 Northern Iowa                   1.50 - 2.40     35% - 50%
 Southern Iowa                   2.40 - 4.41     45% - 90%
 Most of Illinois                1.73 - 2.80     35% - 50%
 Most of Indiana                 2.68 - 4.41     50% - 60%
 NOTE: Rainfall data is from April 1 to May 12
   Source: Weather Services Corp., Bedford, Mass.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
