ID: 122	RANK: 65	SCORE: 8.752347
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880628-0033 </DOCNO>
<HL> 'Foggy' Finckle Saw The Drought Coming And Tipped Japanese --- Corn Belt Forecaster Becomes A Celebrity, but Fame Is Unlikely to Survive Rains </HL>
<AUTHOR> Michael J. McCarthy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> CMD SCR </IN>
<G> CFT </G>
<DATELINE> WHEELING, Ill.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "It's gonna be a scorcher here in Chicago," Earl Finckle tells his radio listeners in his gravelly Midwestern voice. 
"I'm predicting all ties off by 9 a.m. . . . 
All rightie, Fort Wayne. 
We don't see more than a Finckle sprinkle here today. . . . 
There's no question about it, rubber ducky, this hot weather is here to stay." 

   This is a Four-Day Finckle Forecast. 
It's pure Corn Belt, but nowadays the world's financial markets are hanging on every folksy phrase. 

   Drought-obsessed traders, informed by little more than the foresight Mr. Finckle and his colleagues offer, have marched into the grain-trading pits of Chicago's futures markets lately to buy, buy, buy, staking millions of dollars on the continuation of the drought. 
The inflationary implications have roiled international stock and bond markets. 
As market prices pitch and roll in a weather-driven melodrama, unlikely stars like Mr. Finckle, the granddaddy of commodity meteorologists, have emerged from their customary obscurity to hold sway as market seers, enjoying new-found prestige and power. 
It will last until the rains come. 

   From his squat office next to a Best Western motel in this low-rent suburb of Chicago, Mr. Finckle, known to his friends as "Foggy," helped trim more than $375 million off the value of buyers' grain contracts one day last week on the Chicago Board of Trade. 
When he and a handful of other influential meteorologists told clients they saw a renewed chance of rain in parts of the Midwest, traders fell over themselves to sell, and the market's powerful rally quickly turned into a rout. 

   In another shining moment in the annals of commodity meteorology, two Iowa forecasters caused spasms last month on bond markets from New York to Tokyo. 
Just before the Memorial Day weekend, Charles Notis and Harvey Freese in Des Moines noticed a chance of imminent rain. 
After they hedged their forecast of hot and dry weather in the Midwest, farm futures prices fell sharply. 
That signal of easing inflation spurred buying in the U.S. bond market. 
Halfway around the world, another domino fell again: Jittery Japanese traders pushed bonds up sharply. 

   "The forecasters are dictating trading," says Richard Loewy, senior grain and oil-seed analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. 

   Mr. Finckle's voice reaches three million to four million listeners of 16 U.S. radio stations; he makes dozens of broadcasts a day. 
He also operates Central Weather Service, a private weather advisory firm with about 150 clients who pay from $15 for a single aviation report to as much as $25,000 a year for two six-month forecasts plus specialized daily and weekly reports. 

   The drought was no shocker to Mr. Finckle. 
He saw it coming and tipped the Japanese. 

   Last April, he delivered his six-month forecast to Koji Nagasaka, a vice president of Cigra Inc., a grain-trading unit of C. Itoh in Tokyo. 
The Midwest, Mr. Finckle predicted, would be unusually dry. 
The forecast contributed to Cigra's decision to buy grain earlier this year than usual, Mr. Nagasaka says, saving the company lots of money. 
In times like these, says Mr. Nagasaka, "The weather forecaster is the biggest element moving the market." 

   Mr. Finckle, 61, learned weather forecasting as a 17-year-old Air Force recruit in World War II after he was denied cryptography training, he says, because of distant Russian ancestry. 
He has been a weatherman ever since, occasionally enjoying brief moments of celebrity. 
A reporter for a Fargo, N.D., newspaper once spent an entire column trying to answer the question, "Who the hell is Earl Finckle?" 
Hanging on Mr. Finckle's office wall is a document from the mayor of Fort Wayne, Ind., proclaiming July 10, 1976, "Earl Finckle Day." 

   Now he is sought-after again. 
Four other meteorologists answer the telephones at Central Weather, but most of the drought calls are directed to Mr. Finckle himself. 
"No change," he assures a caller from Central Soya Co., a giant agriculture company. 
"Hey, all the soybeans in my back yard are back to normal," he says, teasing another from Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith Inc. 

   In the past week, he also has fielded calls from reporters around the world. 
Last Friday, an associate of New York television personality Geraldo Rivera was on the line, asking Mr. Finckle to appear as his talk-show guest. 
Most afternoons, his lunch, a Tupperware dish of chicken salad and lettuce, warms untouched on his desk. 
An office computer forwards weather maps to his house so he can advise Japanese traders who call through the night. 

   The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the agency that polices the futures industry, has occasionally investigated allegations that weathermen tried to manipulate markets. 
So far, the agency has turned up nothing. 

   But some meteorologists do take positions in the market, raising the possibility that they might trade ahead of their forecasts. 
And last year, some weathermen were getting some market-sensitive National Weather Service forecasts before others. 
"There might have been some people who made money on this," says a Weather Service spokesman. 
To prevent any underhanded dealings, the agency began releasing the data after the farm futures markets closed. 

   But, says John Mielke, the CFTC's head of market surveillance, "There's no insider-trading concept with weather. 
Only God has a monopoly on weather, and he doesn't trade." 
Neither does Mr. Finckle, who thinks trading by a professional forecaster raises ethical questions. 

   There's a discomfort factor in the weatherman's new visibility. 
Mr. Finckle's business can't afford a bum call now, like his blooper in 1967, when he predicted two inches of rain. 
Instead, it snowed 20 inches. 

   Such lapses aside, clients say that Mr. Finckle's calls are uncannily correct. 
In the last big U.S. drought in 1983, he disputed the prevailing opinion among forecasters that a storm system would cross the Mississippi one weekend and shower the Corn Belt. 
When one of his clients, Balfour Maclaine Inc., a Chicago futures firm, told its own customers of the Finckle forecast, they held their positions over the weekend. 
As it turned out, Mr. Finckle was right, says Gerald Zusel, a vice president of Balfour Maclaine. 
His customers made millions of dollars the following week as the market rose sharply. 

   "Consistently, over the last 10 years, Earl Finckle has been more accurate than any other weather forecaster in the business," Mr. Zusel says. 
Some scientists contend that long-term weather forecasting is inherently unreliable. 
But David Bartholomew, an assistant vice president of Merrill Lynch, says that over a 12-year period he examined, Mr. Finckle's six-month forecasts were 85% accurate. 
"That's fantastic," says Mr. Bartholomew. 

   Mr. Finckle is hoping to demonstrate similar prescience this summer. 
One day, he spends much of his time worrying about a low-pressure system he sees over the Gulf of Mexico. 
It has been in limbo for more than a week. 
If it rips loose and creeps up the Mississippi, he says, it could yield several days of hard rain and the first big break in the drought. 

   He pores over his weather map, marks it with green and blue pencils, and sighs. "This is the fly in the ointment," he says. "It just looks like it wants to be in motion." He rises to pace the floor, pausing near a wall plaque titled: "Outdoor Weather Indicator (Accuracy Guaranteed)":
   If it's wet, you know it's raining. 
If it's white, you know it's snowing. 
If it's moving back and forth, You know the wind is blowing. 

   By late afternoon, Mr. Finckle has handled about 100 calls, and he decides to call it a day. 
There's nothing more he can do about the Gulf of Mexico puzzle, except to wait for new data from the National Meteorological Center. 

   As he walks out the door, he's not really sure what the weather will be tomorrow. 
In 44 years in the weather business that's always been the case. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
