ID: 122	RANK: 84	SCORE: 8.512004
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870203-0010 </DOCNO>
<HL> REGIONS:
Why Illinois Has a Bad Case
Of the Mumps Is No Mystery
---
By Eugene Carlson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)
PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<TEXT>
   ILLINOIS LAST WEEK took a public-health step that most states took years ago. 
By order of state health authorities, every Illinois schoolchild, from kindergarten through high school, must show proof of vaccination against mumps, beginning next fall. 

   Illinois is weathering a mini-epidemic of mumps. 
About 40% of the 6,807 mumps cases reported to the Centers for Disease Control from around the U.S. last year occurred in Illinois, mostly in metropolitan Chicago. 

   In an average year, fewer than 50 Chicago-area kids catch the mumps. 
Last year, the figure was close to 2,000. 

   Illinois requires schoolchildren to get shots for a half-dozen communicable diseases, but up to now, mumps hasn't been one of them. 
Nor did it seem to matter. 
Like most American youngsters, Illinois children in recent years have been getting mumps protection as part of a three-in-one shot that vaccinates against mumps, measles and rubella (German measles). 
Measles and rubella are two of the diseases on the mandatory innoculation list for pupils entering Illinois schools. 

   ILLINOIS TEEN-AGERS, however, remain vulnerable to mumps. 
That's because the three-in-one vaccination wasn't widely available before 1975, when that age group was getting its childhood shots. 
Since mumps shots haven't been mandatory, Illinois teen-agers who passed through their childhood without catching the mumps remain ripe for infection. 
Not surprisingly, teens were the ones hit hardest by the current outbreak. 

   The fact that adolescents made up the bulk of the mumps victims makes this outbreak a serious public-health concern for Illinois, and for any state where mumps shots haven't been required. 
The odds of mumps complications -- encephalitis, deafness, inflammation of the testicles, and male and female sterility, among them -- increase when those past puberty catch the viral disease. 

   About one-quarter of Illinois's 2.1 million school-age children aren't immunized against mumps, according to Ralph March, head of the state's immunization program. 
While most children go to private physicians for their innoculations, 20% typically get free shots at state health clinics. 
With mumps vaccines running slightly under $5 a dose and the federal government paying half the bill, the new innoculation rule announced last week figures to cost Illinois about $225,000. 
The crash program may send more youngsters to public clinics, pushing up the state's costs. 

   The Illinois experience could be repeated elsewhere. 
Eighteen states, including Arizona, Maryland, Missouri, North Carolina and Vermont, still don't require mumps shots for schoolchildren. 
Says Mr. March: "Because of the progress we've made in other disease categories, I'd recommend that these states take the necessary steps to add mumps to the school requirements." 

   Other unusual health blips: Kansas had about one-quarter of the nation's 1986 whooping-cough cases, with Topeka and Lawrence the worst spots. 
Rheumatic fever in Utah has run roughly 17 times the national average the past two years. 
The childhood disease typically follows on the heels of strep throat and can produce serious heart problems. 

   ---
   Yankee's Ingenuity Gets a Test in Texas 

   Here's a blow to Texas pride. 
Texas Business, a modest-sized monthly magazine that regularly features profiles of Dallas real estate developers, oil and gas wildcatters, and other Lone Star high rollers, has been bought by (aargh!) 
Yankee Publishing Co. of Dublin, N.H., whose flagship publication is the one-million-circulation Yankee magazine, purveyor of the vision of a perpetually quaint New England, where the lobster reigns and burritos never appear. 

   Rob Trowbridge, Yankee's publisher, says it was another magazine in Yankee's stable, New England Business, that made the Texas magazine purchase worthwhile. (Yankee also publishes Alaska magazine and The Old Farmer's Almanac.) 
The two regional business magazines are roughly the same size -- Texas Business's circulation is 50,000, and New England Business's is 57,500. 
They have also shared the same advertising representative for the past two years. 

   The deal was completed late last year. 
As a first order of business, Mr. Trowbridge shifted Texas Business to the unusual method of building circulation practiced at New England Business. 
"Names don't come from mailing lists but from our own employees. 
Each person throws in five names a day, people who our employees come across in the course of their duties, who our advertisers would like to reach." 

   Those people get a copy of the magazine itself, followed by an invitation to subscribe, mailed first class. 
"Direct mail (meaning junk mail subscription offers) doesn't work for Ross Perot," Mr. Trowbridge says. 
"The loyal secretary throws them all out. 
But she won't throw out a magazine." 

   There's a new business magazine next door in Arizona. 
Arizona Trend, which appeared in mid-1986, is a spinoff of two successful Sun Belt business monthlies, Florida Trend and Georgia Trend. 
The owner is Trend Magazines Inc., of St. Petersburg, Fla. 
Trend's parent, Times Publishing Co., operates the St. Petersburg Times. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
