ID: 122	RANK: 94	SCORE: 8.379486
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880629-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> Grain Futures Plunge as Rain Enters Forecast --- Some Relief for Farm Belt Is Seen Over Weekend, But Drought Isn't Ended </HL>
<AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> CMD </IN>
<DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A change in the weather outlook fueled one of the steepest across-the-board plunges in grain and soybean futures prices in a decade, analysts said. 

   The shift in the weather increased the chances of rain in the Farm Belt, but meteorologists said they don't see a permanent break in the worst dry spell in 50 years. 

   Yesterday's sell-off cooled inflationary fears throughout the financial markets. 
It also ushered in what probably will be a period of extreme price volatility in agricultural commodities as the corn and soybean crops enter their final stages of development and speculators engage in periodic bouts of profit-taking. 

   Yesterday's forecasts by some meteorologists of an increased chance of rain over the long Independence Day weekend sparked a big sell-off in the grain pits on the Chicago Board of Trade, the nation's largest futures market. 

   Prices of most soybean futures contracts plummeted the daily limit of 45 cents a bushel. 
Soybeans for November delivery, which hit a record high last week, fell the limit to $9.77 a bushel. 
Most corn futures contracts dropped their limit of 15 cents a bushel. 
Wheat prices also fell. 

   The retreat in farm futures eased inflationary worries, which helped boost prices in the stock and bond markets. 
The Commodity Research Bureau futures index, a widely watched inflation indicator, closed at 267.20, down 3.32 from the four-year high it hit Monday. 

   The sell-off also reinforced speculation that the bull market in grain is entering a new phase in which some traders expect increasingly wild price swings. 
Prices have climbed so high so quickly that investors are increasingly likely to take profits on any sign that crop damage is slowing, the traders say. 

   What's more, the corn crop is nearing the stage in which it is most sensitive to dry conditions. 
While many analysts say corn production already has been irreversibly harmed by the drought, yields could plunge further if a lack of moisture inhibits the crop's ability to pollinate. 

   Many analysts are hesitant to predict the market's course over the next few days. 
Some had expected futures prices to jump yesterday in the wake of Monday's rally. 

   However, the prospect of rain ignited panic among investors who have owned July futures contracts for several months. 
Some of those buyers will be notified tomorrow that they must take delivery of the commodity when their contracts mature next month. 
To avoid that, many tried to sell the contracts, which pushed prices lower. 

   Some meteorolgists see a better chance of rain in the Midwest over the next 10 days because of signs that the ridge of high pressure that has been stalled over the Great Plains since May is shifting slightly to the west. 
The ridge has been deflecting the storms that normally travel across the Midwest in the spring and early summer. 

   Meanwhile, the jet stream, which guides rain-making systems, is moving south from what has been an unusually far northerly position in Canada. 
These changes, the meteorologists said, are giving the Farm Belt cooler temperatures and its best chance for widespread rain since May. 

   "This is the first time we've seen a potential break in the hot and dry regime," said Harvey Freese, a meteorologist at Des Moines, Iowa-based Freese-Notis Weather Inc. 

   However, most forecasters don't foresee a permanent break in the drought anytime soon. 
That won't happen until the high-pressure system moves east out of the Midwest, among other things. 
Even a return to a normal summer weather pattern would do little to prevent more damage to crops. 
The soil in many farm states didn't get the springtime moisture that crops need to survive the normally hot and dry July and August weather. 

   "There's no good indication of an end to the drought," said John Wright, an agricultural meteorologist for the National Weather Service. 

   If the rains don't return this week, Illinois and Indiana will have had only half the rain they received in their previous driest June in recorded history, according to Peter Leavitt, executive vice president of Weather Services Corp., Bedford, Mass. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
