ID: 122	RANK: 95	SCORE: 8.372725
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880713-0043 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Projects Corn Output Will Fall 26%, Citing Drought's Effects So Far This Year </HL>
<AUTHOR> Albert R. Karr (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> CMD </IN>
<G> AGD </G>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Agriculture Department predicted a 26% plunge in 1988 corn production, to the lowest level since the 1983 drought, based on the severe effects of this year's drought so far. 

   But the estimate is based on an assumption of "normal weather from here on out," Ewen M. Wilson, an assistant secretary of agriculture, told reporters. 
"If the drought continues, we would presumably make some more adjustments." 
The department predicted a corn crop of 5.2 billion bushels. 

   "If you put everything into one pot, everything bodes well for higher prices," said Richard Loewy, senior grain and oil-seed analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

   It also projected a 14% decline in soybean output this year, to 1.65 billion bushels, and a 13% drop in the wheat harvest, to 1.84 billion bushels. 
The major winter-wheat crop planted last fall, already being harvested, will be slightly higher than last year's, but 1988's spring wheat, like other spring-planted grains, is being hit by sharp drought damage, the department said in a report yesterday. 

   The crop reports are expected to further improve prospects for pending multibillion-dollar drought-relief legislation, by reinforcing lawmakers' concerns. 
The department "tends to be pretty conservative" in its estimates, Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.), chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, said in an interview. 
But even yesterday's figures are "shocking. 
If there were any questions that there's going to be drought relief, this guarantees there will be," Sen. Leahy said. 

   Lawmakers are rushing to enact the bill designed to help farmers most in need of drought-assistance, provide some relief from federal loan debts, and give hard-hit livestock producers surplus hay and feed grains. 
Its cost is expected to be covered by savings from lower crop subsidies as the drought tightens supplies and raises prices. 
The bill is expected to be approved by Congress and signed by the president soon. 

   Considering that grain stocks have been ample, supplies will still be "more than enough" to meet domestic and foreign demand, Mr. Wilson said. 
"The immediate problem is not one of shortages, but . . . responding in a compassionate way" to farmer losses, he said. 

   The report means prices are likely to rise even higher, especially for wheat and soybeans, analysts said. 
But consumers will see only a "very slight" rise in food prices because of the drought, Mr. Wilson said. 
He added that the department expects later this month to revise its price forecast for 1988, probably to an average increase of 3% to 5%, from an earlier estimate of 2% to 4%. 
Meat prices will likely decline, as cattle and hog farmers slaughter more animals amid higher feed prices and lack of forage. 

   The 6-day to 10-day weather outlook for large parts of the drought-stricken central region of the U.S. shows some improvement, calling for normal rainfall despite continued above-normal temperatures, said Norton Strommen, the department's chief meteorologist. 
An updated National Weather Service 30-day forecast is expected today. 

   However, in issuing its estimates, the department said that "much of the corn is currently in or near the critical reproductive stage. 
Weather conditions over the next few weeks will be especially critical in determining the size of the corn crop." 
Private grain analysts, in fact, have predicted declines in corn production larger than the 26% government estimate, to a harvest as low as four billion bushels. 

   Although the report forecasts a sharp decline in corn production -- nearly matching 1983's 28% drop -- it tends to underplay the drought's severity by assuming normal rainfall in coming weeks. 

   Indeed, the department has said in a separate report to the president that the drought's effect on the "heart" of the Corn Belt to date has been the greatest in recorded history -- even harsher than a major dry period in 1934. 

   Officials said the drought nationwide is considered the most severe since the 1930s. 
But Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng this week told a farm group that the drought is "the worst drought we've ever had." 

   The department's crop reports issued yesterday were based on some special surveys of grain yields and farmers' expectations for acreage harvesting. 

   The department issues a corn-production estimate each year in July, reflecting yield-per-acre and acreage trends based on May and June reviews. 
But this time, it sought to update those earlier reviews with the less-formal special surveys, while also analyzing the effect of drought on crops based on past droughts. 

   While not reporting an official yield figure, department officials said they currently estimate the 1988 corn yield at 87 bushels an acre, sharply lower than the 1987 average yield of 119.4 bushels an acre. 

   The formal report showed that, at this time, growers expect to harvest 59.7 million acres of corn, up 1% from last year. 
This would be 88% of their planted acreage, compared with 90% actually harvested in 1987, already showing a sizable abandonment of drought-affected crops. 
And it's likely that the growers will end up abandoning more acreage than the current numbers suggest. 

   Furthermore, officials said much of the acreage that will be harvested will produce little, if any, grain for feeding livestock, the major use of corn, though it would provide some silage. 
One problem: corn farmers are being told to raise their harvesting cutters a foot off the ground, to avoid scooping up nitrate-laden low ends of corn plants that could poison cattle. 
With so little moisture available, the corn hasn't used the nitrate fertilizer efficiently, said one department official. 

   But with cutters held high, in many instances "you'd be cutting nothing but a little chaff," he said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
