ID: 167	RANK: 49	SCORE: 4.561172
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880610-0032 </DOCNO>
<HL> Small Business (A Special Report): In the Trenches --- Save! Money! Now! Homemade Commercials May Be Tasteless, But They Sure Move Goods Out the Door </HL>
<AUTHOR> Erik Larson </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> TEL MKT </IN>
<TEXT>
   HERE IT COMES, the great leap that even Houston children now mimic. 
James "Mack" McIngvale is standing before a camera at Houston's Channel 39, talking so fast his gestures seem out of sync. 

   "Why do I have these bags under my eyes? 
Why do I look tired and drained?" he cries. 
"Because I've been busy marking down prices for our Memorial Day sale, that's why!" 
The cameraman bends over and splays his hands under the lense, dropping fingers one by one to count the remaining seconds. 
Nine, eight, seven. . . . 
"My eyes are tired, but the values are yours!" 
Mack says. 
"And remember, Gallery Furniture Saves . . . 
You . . ." And here it is. 
Mack leaps into the sky. 
Airborne, he grabs a roll of money from his back pocket and punches it toward the camera. 
"Gallery Furniture Saves . . . 
You . . . 
Mmmmmoney!" 

   A keeper. 

   But Mr. McIngvale's grin fades quickly; his face goes dour. 
He loves doing these commercials, but he needs to conserve energy. 
In three hours, he will shoot 25 commercials for his Gallery Furniture store, each ad-libbed on the spot. 
A rubber chicken lies supine off-screen, awaiting its debut later in the series. 
Says Sean O'Neel, who will appear today opposite Mr. McIngvale in a commercial, "These are the ads every ad agency in town hates and every retailer loves." 

   They're called "screamers." 
Lee Iaccoca can afford to hire big-time agencies and spend months and millions on television campaigns, but small-business men can't. 
Instead, they take the low road, getting the word out through kitsch and pure bravado, starring in ads they write and produce themselves. 
In Detroit, for example, Mel Farr, an automobile dealer and former Detroit Lions running back, takes to the skies as the "Superstar" dealer. 
"A black man in a cape on TV selling automobiles, that has to be unique," he says. 

   The screamers buy cheap air. 
They scream from the "fringe," trade slang for the periods just before and just after the prime morning and evening hours. 
They haunt graveyard TV, the 1 a.m. to 4 a.m. stretch. 
Some do their screaming on cable. 
Time is cheap, too, in America's remote TV outposts. 
There are 212 television markets in America, the first -- the largest -- being New York, the last being Glendive, Montana. 
This is Kraig Erickson's turf. 
The owner of Don's Shoes, Mr. Erickson poses as a bunny in his Easter commercials. 
In his 10 years of advertising on Glendive's KXGN-TV, he has paid as little as $8 for a 30-second spot. 
By contrast, 30 seconds during the last Superbowl cost advertisers $645,000 -- $21,500 a second. 

   Cut-rate commercials are not slick. 
And what they lack in sophistication, well, they also often lack in taste. 
Says Mike Davis, president of Prime Productions, a video studio in Upper Darby, Pa., "Nobody ever said you had to have taste to be successful." 

   Take Ben Krass. 
Please. 

   The owner of Krass Bros. men's and boys' stores in Philadelphia, he's been doing his own commercials for 20 years. 
In one of his early spots, he climbed into a casket and played dead. 
As he was carried before the camera, he sat up and stared into the lens. 
"If you gotta go," he told viewers, "go in a Krass Brothers suit." 

   Lately, Mr. Krass has been favoring more lively props. 
"Amazons! 
You understand what I mean?" he says. 
He is referring to the women who carried him from a more-recent commercial. 
"They gotta be Amazons. 
Nobody under six-feet." 

   Some businessmen prefer animals. 
Cal Worthington, a Sacramento, Calif., auto-dealer tycoon, has appeared in his commercials with pigs, tigers, hippos, elephants and, recently, an iguana. 
He introduces each as "my dog Spot." 
In Detroit, Joe Ricci, owner of a Jeep-Eagle dealership, also experimented with animals. 
Once, he posed with four horses to convey the message, "We don't horse around." 

   Someone should have shown the script to the horses. 
Three took off at a gallop down the median strip of Detroit's Mack Avenue, leaving Mr. Ricci behind, holding tight to the reigns of the fourth. 
A posse of Jeeps took off in pursuit. 
The horses' handler, a young woman, leapt onto Mr. Ricci's horse and kicked away in a cloud of dust. 
She managed to stop the stampede. 

   The scary thing is, these commercials work. 
Shirley Tabb, one of 50 car salespeople at Koons Ford of Baltimore, makes her own commercials telling people to buy from her. 
She now sells an average of 35 cars a month, four times the national average for car salesmen. 
"Do you think it's going to take a miracle for you to buy your next new or used car, truck or van?" she asks, in her latest commercial. 
At the word "miracle" she sprouts wings, a halo and a wand. 
"Maybe, but not necessarily." 

   She made the angel commercial at a discount production studio in Baltimore for $1,400. 
She spends $3,000 a month for 50 spots on Channel 54, a local independent. 
It's money well spent. 
"I better not tell you how much I make," she says, laughing. 

   For viewers, commercials featuring businessmen seem to build a bond and enhance credibility. 
"There's a relationship," says Maurice J. Lezell, a Danny Thomas look-alike, and owner of Belvedere Construction Inc., of Southfield, Mich. 
Presenting himself as "Mister Belvedere," he has been starring in his own TV commercials since 1960. 
"Most of the guys in my business, they hide behind three desks, they're so afraid," he says. 

   For the stars, the commercials bring fame. 
Locally, at least. 
Says Mel Farr: "People feel they know me. 
They see me in their living rooms, in their bedrooms, in their dens. 
When they see me on the street, they don't call me Mel Farr -- they call me Mel Farr, Superstar." 

   ---
   James McIngvale is bent over at the waist, like a man broken by a vicious cramp. 
He's counting his fingers, trying to figure out if the Fourth of July falls on a Monday this year. 
Satisfied that it does, he ad-libs a July Fourth sale. 
For three hours straight, he stands there in the lights against a radiant blue background, making up commercial after commercial, only once checking his cue card -- a furniture tag on which he has jotted some ideas. 

   "Look," he cries, "Look, up in the sky, in the sky! 
It's a bird, it's a plane -- no, it's your new recliner. . . ." 

   What his audience will see, instead of the blue background, is Mr. McIngvale standing before a recliner. 
One studio camera is focused on a manufacturer's photograph; another is aimed at Mr. McIngvale. 
Through an act of video wizardry, Mr. McIngvale will be superimposed over the photograph. 
Another 50 such photographs await their turn on the floor at the back of the studio, next to the rubber chicken. 

   Mr. McIngvale credits commercials like these with saving his company from an early death. 
He founded Gallery in 1981 in an abandoned model-home park on a freeway feeder. 
Back then, Houston's oil economy was booming. 
With so many families moving to town, Mr. McIngvale says, anyone could have sold furniture and done well. 
But two years later, the Texas economy went bust. 
Gallery had to start drawing established residents, or close. 
"I took the last $10,000 I had and bet the company on television," Mr. McIngvale says. 

   His first commercial, in February 1983, didn't come easy. 
He spent an entire night struggling to make a single spot. 
In the middle of the last try, he realized he would come up five seconds short. 
Driven by sheer frustration, he tore some money from his pocket, leapt into the air and invented his now famous tagline. 

   Business picked up literally overnight. 
In 1982, just before the great oil bust, Gallery had sales of $2 million. 
This year, Mr. McIngvale estimates, it will have $30 million in sales -- despite the still-languishing Texas economy. 
Now, moreover, he's a star. 
He gets asked to speak to schools and Rotary clubs; on weekends, fans come to the store just to get his autograph. 
But Mr. McIngvale insists, "I'm not a celebrity -- I'm just a guy who spends a lot of money to get on TV." 

   Nearby sits Sean O'Neel. 
He plays "Mr. 
Solid Wood" in Gallery's radio commercials. (He is somewhat less solid these days, having lost nearly 200 pounds since having his stomach stapled last year; now he weighs a mere 280.) 
He leans over and whispers that when his daughter was two and a half, she began leaping up and down shouting "Saves . . . 
You . . . 
Money!" 
"If a child, a baby, can remember something," he says, "it's almost impossible for an adult to forget it." 

   Mr. O'Neel, wearing overalls and a flowered shirt, now puts on a baseball cap. 
He grabs the rubber chicken by the legs. 
The camera starts recording. 
Mimicking a back-country yokel, Mr. O'Neel confronts Mr. McIngvale. 
"I got mah eatin' chicken here," Mr. O'Neel shouts. 
"Ah need a table to eat mah chicken on. 
You got one?" 

   "Yes," says Mr. McIngvale. 
And his mouth is off and running: "You-need-a-solid-oak-table-and-chairs- to-eat-your-Sunday-afternoon-dinner-on- up-there-in-Waller?" 

   O'Neel: "That's what ah need." 

   McIngvale: "How-about-this-beautiful-dining-room- table-and-chairs?..." 

   ...
And at last, the great leap upward. 
"Gallery Furniture will Save . . . 
You . . . 
Mmmmmoney!" 

   Everyone relaxes. 
The cameraman leans out. 
"If I'd a known, I'd a brought you a real chicken," he says. 
"Have it flappin' through the whole spot. 
Now that'd be great." 

   ---
   Mr. Larson is a former Wall Street Journal reporter. 
His first novel, "A Good Chance of Dying," will be published next year by Villard Books. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
