ID: 167	RANK: 60	SCORE: 4.236555
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890731-0086 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890731 </DD>
<AN> 890731-0086. </AN>
<HL> Take a China Tour
@  If, Like Garbo, You
@  Want to Be Alone
@  ---
@  When the Tanks Rolled In,
@  Tourists Fled; Now There
@  Are No Lines, Great Views
@  ----
@  By Amanda Bennett
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 07/31/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> FREST NWA </CO>
<DATELINE> GUILIN, China  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Once, the chance to gaze at the mountains jutting from swirling mists here might have been a cause for envy among friends and neighbors. 

   For Edward Blondski and his family, however, the sentiment was more like pity. 
"Our friends said, 'We'll send flowers for your coffin,'" says the 46-year-old machinist from Buffalo, N.Y. 
He and his family came to China under duress: Though martial law had been declared in the country's capital, and soldiers were in the streets, the Blondskis' tour operator wouldn't refund the $15,000 for an 18-day trip booked a year earlier. 
"Our friends thought we were foolish to go," says Mr. Blondski. 

   But the Blondskis had the last laugh. 
"Everywhere we went we were treated like VIPs," he says. 
Hotel rooms were filled with flowers and fruit. 
Attendants rushed to offer tea and hot towels. 
As one of the few American tours still traveling in China just a few weeks after the bloodshed in Beijing, Mr. Blondski says his group was filmed by Cable News Network and interviewed by Chinese television crews in Beijing. 

   ". . . and in Wuxi, Suzhou and Guilin," interrupts his 12-year-old daughter Christine. 
"Isn't it awesome?" 

   Such red-carpet treatment is all part of the Chinese effort to lure back the well-heeled tourists who once arrived in droves on airplanes, slept in luxury hotels, traveled in cars and sprinkled money, like spring rain, into a parched economy. 
"Tourism Brings Prosperity and Progress" reads a sign, in English and Chinese, at the gate to the tombs of 13 Ming Dynasty emperors outside Beijing. 
Specifically, tourism brought hard currency, $2.2 billion worth last year, or about 2% to 3% of the country's foreign exchange income. 
In l988, there were about 300,000 U.S. tourists in China, or about 16% of total foreign tourists. 

   But this year, the tourist season in China ended before it had really begun. 
The tanks and gunfire in the nation's capital routed not only students from the Square, but tourists from their beds. 
Panic-stricken travelers fled for the borders -- and with them, an estimated $1 billion. 
Now that the tanks have pulled out, China's tourism authorities have offered to guarantee the safety of visitors who return. 
Industry officials are wining and dining travel agents in Beijing and Hong Kong. 
Luxury tourist hotels are offering $59.99 specials on hotel rooms that once fetched up to $100. 
Chinese officials are stressing that things are back to normal and that China is fun again. 

   But it's an uphill battle. 
Beijing is still under martial law, and still a site only for the stouthearted. 
Red banners float from luxury hotels: "Respect the People's Liberation Army," they read, in Chinese. 
"Oppose bourgeois liberalism." 
The streets are quiet, but soldiers still stand on street corners gripping AK-47 assault rifles. 
At night, they check cars for fugitives. 
One day recently, they chased a busload of Japanese tourists, and detained two of them briefly. 
The problem: taking pictures in Tiananmen Square. 

   "You're nervous in Beijing and you just want to get out, but otherwise you're comfortable," says Mr. Blondski. 

   Fear and politics are keeping tourists away. 
At the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel in Beijing, Victor Kimura, director of sales promotion, flips through facsimile messages from America. 
Up to 90% of would-be travelers say they don't want to support the Chinese government by spending money there, one tour operator writes. 
Writes another operator, who is planning just two tour groups in 1990, instead of the 14 previously scheduled: "It will take longer than we thought to make (travelers) forget the whole thing." 
Northwest Airlines has had a 78% drop in bookings to China. 
"Our long-range bookings aren't climbing briskly," says a Northwest spokesman. 
"Tourists will have to have their confidence restored before they flock back." 

   Before the demonstrations in Beijing, to be a tourist in China was to be the kind of masochist who goes to Times Square on New Year's Eve, or hopes to buy Superbowl tickets the day of the game. 
Trains in China regularly pulled away from stations with 200% of their seats full. 
In many cities, hotel rooms couldn't be had for love or money. 

   Now, in hotel hallways and restaurants the air conditioning is turned off and lights are turned down to save money. 
Some hotel rooms lack toilet paper, towels and soap; few guests are expected, so rooms aren't made up. 

   Tourist sites are nearly deserted. 
Not only foreign, but Chinese tourists have been scared into staying home. 
Here in Guilin, which has, perhaps, the most romantic topography in China, the 80 to 90 tour boats that used to ply the Li River daily have dwindled to just three. 

   For a change, sightseers can actually see the sights. 
Just outside Beijing, an hour-and-a-half-long walk along the normally packed Great Wall turns up just four Western faces and only small clumps of Chinese travelers. 
The vendors here who once charged picture-takers for the privilege of photographing them with their camels are all but out of business. 
Their photogenic camels are lying down. 

   In Canton, there isn't any wait for the restrooms at the China Hotel, where the minibuses that cross the boarder carrying day-trippers from Hong Kong routinely stop. 
Drinkers in the cocktail lounge of the White Swan Hotel, which overlooks the Pearl River, drink alone. 
One American traveler, on a repeat visit to Xian, reported finally being able to see the famous terra cotta soldiers, and not the back of some fellow traveler's head. 

   Personal attention abounds. 
As the only two people in one tour who didn't cancel their trip through southern China, Christopher and Gerdy Gouw of Lehighton, Pa., have a guide all to themselves, a young man who hangs morosely on the railing of a Li River sightseeing boat. 
"It's like a private tour," says Mrs. Gouw happily. 

   But mostly the travelers who remain are adventurers and students, what one hotelier calls "soldiers of fortune." 
Alonso Gonzalo, a 24-year-old student from Spain, and Marilyne Surita, 25, from France, were in Inner Mongolia when the tanks rolled into Beijing. 
They proceeded on to the capital anyway and stayed for more than a week. 
They weren't afraid, and didn't see any reason to leave. 
They didn't spend much money either, though. 
Their total tab for a two-month trip spent staying in Chinese hostels, eating in street stalls and traveling fourth class: $500 U.S. apiece. 
Including souvenirs. 

   In an attempt to lure back bigger spenders, China's tourism officials and hoteliers are turning to their neighbors. 
Some of the first invited back to see the situation were Taiwanese tour operators. 
Taiwan has only recently begun allowing its citizens to return to visit friends and family, and the drive to see the Motherland is still strong. 

   The tour operators are just as eager to persuade their customers. 
Suchart Morakotdacho, with Hengchiang Tour and Travel Service Co. in Bangkok, is videotaping peaceful scenes in Beijing, Nanjing Suzhou, Shanghai, Guilin and Canton to show back home. 
Pacific Delight, which bills itself as the U.S.'s biggest packager of tours to China, offers 94 tours, of which 60% involve China. 
Though Lythia Rousseas, a marketing associate with the firm, says the company expects its schedule to be off about 20% from last year, "for those who still want to go, we will still be going." 

   Even in the streets, people are doing their part. 
Outside the Seven Star park, in Guilin, many of the metal stalls from which vendors sold mock People's Liberation army hats, T-shirts and replica opium pipes are empty; vendors have turned back their licenses, unable to pay the 200 yuan -- about $54 -- monthly rental. 
A group of four men at one stall plays cards to while away the time. 
"Welcome back the foreigners," one cries. 
"Foreigners are great. 
They spend money." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
