ID: 167	RANK: 67	SCORE: 3.999054
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861226-0065 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Previews and Prognostications
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 12/26/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The whereabouts of Joe DiMaggio has ceased to be the No. 1 mystery in sports. 
Four entire teams dropped from sight in the just-concluded National Football League regular season. 

   The four are the Dallas Cowboys, Los Angeles Raiders, Miami Dolphins and Pittsburgh Steelers. 
Not a year had gone by since the NFL and the American Football League merged in 1966 that at least two of them hadn't qualified for the championship playoffs, and in 13 of those 20 seasons at least three of them made the tournament. 
Together, they collected 11 of the 20 Super Bowl trophies. 

   But this year -- poof! -- none of them made the playoffs and only one, Miami, registered a better-than-.500 won-lost record. 
It's almost like waking up in the morning and finding all the General Motors car dealers out of business and their properties occupied by Dairy Queens. 

   It's no mystery what happened to the Big Four: A couple decades of bottom-of-the-heap draft positions took their toll. 
That's the way the NFL is supposed to work. 
What was surprising was the suddenness of their joint pratfall. 
Last season, Dallas, Miami and the Raiders earned their accustomed playoff places, and the Steelers played in the AFC championship game just the year before. 

   Ah, but appearances were deceiving and the termites had been busy. 
After the Cowboys lost their last five games, dipping to a 7-9 mark and an early vacation, Coach Tom Landry commented that his team had been "on the verge" of collapse for the last three campaigns, and that this year "it finally happened." 

   Landry, moreover, was gloomy about a quick rebound. 
"We aren't thinking playoffs or anything for next year," said he. 
"We've just got to put a team on the field that's competitive." 
Oh well, we can always watch the Cowboys cheerleaders while America's Team rebuilds. 

   The 1986 season also will go down as the year of the young quarterback. 
Two of the 10 playoff teams (Chicago and the L.A. Rams) have rookies currently starting behind center and Cleveland's Bernie Kosar is a second-year man. 
Jay Schroeder of Washington is in his third year, but didn't play until last season was two-thirds over. 
Denver's John Elway, New England's Tony Eason and the New York Jets' Ken O'Brien all are in season four. 
Some non-playoff teams also had youngsters at QB for large chunks of the season, in part because of an injury list at the position like a holiday highway toll. 

   Offense declined around the NFL, with the average points scored by both sides per game (41) and total yardage (648) the lowest in any full season since 1980. 
Reason dictates that the high turnover at quarterback was to blame, but, as is common in sports, what is reasonable is wrong. 
Passing yardage held up but yards-rushing tumbled to 237 a game. 
Believe it or not, that's the lowest full-season figure since 1943, when the players wore leather helmets and a creature called a Steagle roamed the gridirons. 
Obviously, the trend toward passing (and away from the ground game) is no passing fancy in the league. 

   OK, I know you're getting edgy, so it's on to the main event of this column, Lem Banker's annual playoff forecast. 
You may recall my noting in previous years that the estimable Mr. Banker is the Sage of the Las Vegas Strip and the Wizard of Odds. 
Better yet, he's solvent. 

   Lem gets his football from television, and has become irked by the performance of pre-game TV pundits Jimmy "The Greek" Snyder (CBS) and Paul Maguire (NBC). 
"The joke around Las Vegas is that The Greek is the second-best handicapper in the U.S. and Maguire is third," he says. 
"About 250 guys here claim they're tied for first." 

   Here's Lem's rundown, starting with the NFC: 

   San Francisco -- The 49ers are my pick to go all the way. 
They're healthy, coming off some good wins and have more offensive variety than anyone else. 
Their best card is veteran Joe Montana at quarterback. 
He can do more things on a football field than Julia Child in a kitchen. 

   New York Giants -- They're No. 2 in the league in my book. 
They have an excellent defense and running game. 
Their passing attack is just OK, though. 

   Chicago -- This is my third-best team. 
Their defense is so good that if the government hired it, it could dump Star Wars. 
But you have to score to win, and with rookie Doug Flutie at quarterback and other backs fumbling three or four times a game, they don't figure to do it much. 

   Los Angeles Rams -- Another team with a child to lead it. 
Jim Everett will be a top quarterback some year, but probably not this one. 

   Washington -- President Reagan lost his Teflon coating, but the Redskins' defense picked it up. 
Nothing sticks to it any more. 

   New England -- The Patriots are my fourth-best team overall, but they look like the class of the AFC. 
They're not exceptional anywhere, but they've won when they had to. 
Both their quarterbacks, Eason and Steve Grogan, throw soft passes, and that's an advantage in cold weather. 

   Cleveland -- Another team that's better as a whole than its pieces look individually. 
Playing at home throughout the AFC playoffs is the Browns' big edge. 
Does anyone look forward to visiting Cleveland? 

   Denver -- The Broncos were mile-high after winning their first six games, but came back to earth with a 5-5 mark thereafter. 
Their defense has been ragged and Elway is off the mark. 
His heavy passes are tough to catch in the cold. 

   Kansas City -- The Chiefs' special teams are special, but not their O and D. 

   New York Jets -- They've lost their last five games and have given up more points than they've scored. 
Need I say more? 

   Nope, Lem, you've said it all. 

   ---
   Mr. Klein, the Journal's sports columnist, recently was co-author, with Mr. Banker, of "Lem Banker's Book of Sports Betting" (E.P. 
Dutton, 204 pages, $8.95). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
