ID: 167	RANK: 75	SCORE: 3.813339
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870821-0082 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Steller Cellar Dwellers
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 08/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> HAMMOND, La.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The question before the house, says Jim Finks, is whether a football team must "get good" before it can win, or win before it can get good. 
He suspects that the latter of those propositions is true. 

   That should come as good news to fans of the National Football League's New Orleans Saints, who need all the encouragement they can get. 
In their 20 years of travail, the Saints have neither won nor gotten good, so it's nice to know that someone in authority (Finks is the Saints' president and general manager) thinks you can have one without the other. 

   This also ought to buoy the Saints players, struggling through another purgatorial training camp at Southeastern Louisiana University in Hammond, an hour north of their home base. 
It's so steamy here that it's a daily tossup whether the temperature or humidity will top 90 first. 

   "Kinda hot for two-a-day, huh, Rickey?" shouted a fan to Rickey Jackson, the Saints' veteran linebacker, as Jackson trudged onto the field Wednesday afternoon for the second of the day's workouts. 
"Kinda hot for just one," Jackson grunted. 

   In the near past, the Saints might have been excused for wondering what all the sweat was for. 
They are the only team in the NFL that not only hasn't made the post-season playoffs, but also has never finished with a better-than-.500 won-lost record. 
Last season, under new prexy Finks and new coach Jim Mora, they threatened respectability by winning six of their first 11 outings. 
But they drooped to a 7-9 mark overall. 

   Nevertheless, the showing was good enough to spark hope for the coming season. 
"We had a touch of success, and because we're so young we gotta think we'll improve," says defensive back Dave Waymer, an eight-year veteran. 
"At least, our fans wore regular caps at our games, not shopping bags." 

   That last reference was to 1980, Waymer's rookie season and the Saints' nadir. 
They posted a 1-15 record, and some of the folks who showed up for their games redubbed them the "Aints" and wore shopping bags over their heads in protest. 
The gesture remains the team's main contribution to American sporting culture. 

   The Saints then were the property of John Mecom Jr., the son of a wealthy oilman. 
His regime began when New Orleans was awarded an NFL franchise in 1967 after some antitrust wheeling and dealing by Russell Long and Hale Boggs, the state's two congressional wheel-and-deal horses. 
It was marked by what one former employee calls "unorganized chaos." 

   Mecom changed coaches nine times in his 19 years as boss, almost as often as he traded in his limos. 
Three of those coaches bore the dreaded "interim" label, and lasted 16 games all told. 

   The Saints also distinguished themselves in that era for some eccentric drafting. 
In 1979, they amazed and amused footballdom by using their No. 1 choice to draft barefoot punter Russell Erxleben of the University of Texas, who, it turned out, could punt in the pros neither barefoot nor shod. 
Their top pick in 1982 was Lindsay Scott, a slow wide receiver from Georgia. 
He was cut after four so-so seasons. 
Also among the missing are quarterback Richard Todd and running back Earl Campbell, over-the-hill types that cost the Saints their No. 1 picks in 1984 and '85. 

   Mecom made his best deal in mid-1985, when he sold the team for $70 million to a group headed by Tom Benson, an auto dealer. 
Benson might have made his best deal six months later, when he hired Finks to run the team. 
Finks is a respected football M.D. who previously had spanked life into the infant Minnesota Vikings and helped resuscitate the Chicago Bears. 
He brings to his house calls a philosophy as well as his doctor's bag. 

   "You build good teams from the inside out, starting with big linemen," Finks declares, opining that the 20-game NFL schedule (16 regular-season contests plus four pre-season outings) has turned the one-time autumn game into an endurance test. 
He's backed that up by making Jim Dombrowski, a 6-foot-6, 290-pound offensive lineman, his No. 1 draft pick in 1986, and Shawn Knight, a 6-6, 290-pound defensive end, his top choice in '87 (alas, Knight is still unsigned). 

   Finks says he also believes in surrounding himself with "honest" evaluators of talent because "you don't get ahead by kidding yourself," and the blunt-spoken Mora, his choice as head coach, seemingly fills that bill. 

   "How good were we last year?" echoes Mora, whose teams won two titles in the old U.S. Football League. 
"Not very good. 
We could have been 5-11 as easily as 7-9. 
But we accomplished a few things, like getting our rushing defense together and establishing our own ground game. 
That gives us something to build on." 

   The Saints defense is anchored by vets Jackson, defensive end Bruce Clark and nose tackle Tony Elliott. 
It has been on offense that the Finks-Mora partnership has made itself felt most. 
Rueben Mayes, a third-round draft choice out of Washington State, ran for 1,353 yards last year and was named NFL rookie of the year. 
He'll be joined in the backfield this season by Dalton Hilliard, Mel Gray and Barry Word, all in their first or second seasons. 

   Mora tapped his USFL connections for Chuck Commiskey, a large, (6-4, 290) quick guard, linebacker Sam Mills and safety Antonio Gibson, all starters. 
None spent the last training camp with the Saints, so Mora considers them virtual NFL rookies. 
The continued good health of Brad Edelman, an injury-plagued guard, would be another plus. 

   The Saints have problems at quarterback and wide receiver, among other places, so their millennium probably isn't yet at hand. 
But they at least have begun to think positively. 
"When my neighbors in New Orleans bug me about 20 bad years, I remind them I've only been here five," says tight end John Tice. 
"I also tell 'em that I'll only listen to their beefs if they promise to applaud me real loud when we turn it around." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
