ID: 167	RANK: 76	SCORE: 3.803873
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881028-0035 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports: Waiting in the Wings </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Santa Clara, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   When Steve Young was growing up in Greenwich, Conn., he was the best athlete around. 
Whatever the sport -- football, baseball, basketball, golf, tennis -- he'd be picked first when the kids chose up sides. 
Well, maybe not in tennis and golf, which aren't team games, but you get the idea. 

   The same things happened in high school and college, although there the coaches, not the kids, did the choosing. 
Steve was so good at Brigham Young University, where he matriculated, that he was better known around campus as an All-American quarterback than as a great-great-great-grandson of the energetic fellow (he had 27 wives) for whom the place is named. 

   Now Young is a full-grown 26 years old, and still a very nifty jock. 
He could be the best combination passer-runner in all of what passes (or runs) for the civilized football world. 
But alas, come Sunday, when the big boys play, he watches. 
Specifically, he watches Joe Montana, the starting quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers, the team for which both perform. 
For the nonce, Steve is Joe's backup. 

   "Joe's about as good as there is. 
That's great for the team, but not so great for me," says Young in the locker room at the Niners' spiffy new training facility in this South Bay community near the city they call home. 
"I'd rather be playing, but what can I do? 
Just wait for my opportunity, I guess." 

   He continues: "It's frustrating. 
I want to start, and I put on my pads every Sunday believing that I will. 
When it doesn't happen, I have to psyche myself up to go through the next week's preparations with a positive attitude. 
I know that I'll get my chance sometime, but I also know that it'll probably come at Joe's expense. 
That makes it kind of ghoulish, but that's the way these things work." 

   As it is, Young's lot well may be envied by many. 
The left-handed thrower is handsomely paid (a reported $700,000 this year) to stand on the sidelines during games, warmly dressed, wig-wagging signals to Montana when the Niners' offense is at work. 
In keeping with the adage that the backup quarterback is every National Football League team's most-popular player, he gets weekly stacks of fan mail, "95% of it favorable," he says. 
And when he does get in for a series or two of downs, as he has these past few weeks, it's usually after the game has been won or lost, so he bears little responsibility for the outcome. 

   Young could count still another blessing, if he were so inclined. 
Pro-football quarterbacking has become a perilous proposition this year, with QBs enjoying the professional life expectancies of Lebanese motorists, and on the sidelines he is pretty much beyond the reach of rampant, 280-pound linemen bent on mayhem. 
Ah, but the hot blood of competitiveness surges through Young's veins, so much so that he forsook the established NFL for the fledgling U.S. Football League when his BYU days were done. 
He did that mostly, he says, because the new league's Los Angeles Express dangled the prospect of an immediate starting role. 

   Yes, Young admits, money also played a role in that decision. 
His deal with Express owner Bill Oldenburg was supposed to have been worth $48 million, including a $2.5 million signing bonus and $37 million annuity. 
But the team, and the league, foundered 16 months after Young came aboard, negating the annuity, and Young had to buy out part of the rest of the pact in order to join the NFL's Tampa Bay Buccaneers in mid-season 1985. 
"I wound up with a couple years' decent salary for a No. 1 draft choice," he says without getting specific. 

   He opines that his Express experience was "interesting" from a number of standpoints. 
From the football side, he was almost his team's entire offense, and set the curious record of becoming the first pro player to pass for 300 yards and run for 100 in a single game. 
It also gave the lawyer's son a look at life on the greasy edge. 

   "We got on the bus to go to one game, and the driver wouldn't move until he got paid," Young recalls. 
"Oldenburg offered him a check, but the guy demanded cash. 
We had to take up a collection among the players before he'd start his motor." 

   At Tampa Bay in the NFL, where he signed a six-year, $5.25 million contract, life was financially more secure, but professionally precarious. 
Flung into action against the big-time pros behind a weak line, Young threw almost twice as many interceptions as touchdowns, and fled with the ball more often than he ran it. 
After the Bucs' 2-14 record in 1986 entitled them to draft Vinnie Testaverde, the year's glamour college quarterback, they traded Young and his hefty contract to San Francisco. 

   Young says he was "excited" by the move; the 49ers, after all, had been Super Bowl champs in 1982 and '85 and had a complex, quarterback-oriented offense directed by coach Bill Walsh, one of the pro game's geniuses-by-consensus. 
The first thing Young learned was that he'd have to learn more here than elsewhere. 

   "We put in more new plays every week than some teams have in their entire systems," he says with a trace of awe. 

   Still, the young man learned while he earned, and drew praise from his coach for bringing "explosive movement and spontaneity" to the fray. 
Late last season, after Montana was hurt, he dashed and passed his team to lopsided wins over Chicago, Atlanta and the L.A. Rams. 
He threw for 10 touchdowns and no interceptions, and his score in the league's complicated rating system topped Montana's. 

   When the 1988 campaign began, however, Young was back on the bench. 
He was ineffective in his one start this season, against the New York Giants, and fizzled in spot appearances against Denver, the Rams and, last Monday night, the Bears, who edged the Niners in a 10-9 bruise fest. 
He came in for his team's last offensive series in that one, but couldn't engineer a first down. 

   Montana hurt his back Monday, adding injury to injury (his elbow was already sore), so Young might start this Sunday when the Niners, 5-3 in the won-lost column, play Minnesota at home. 
Then again, maybe Montana will. 
For now, Young is being philosophical. 
"Joe tells me a good NFL quarterback has to have patience," he says. 
"No one can say I'm not learning that here." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
