ID: 167	RANK: 88	SCORE: 3.638142
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890818-0137 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890818 </DD>
<AN> 890818-0137. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
@  Resurrecting 'Titletown'
@  ----
@  By Frederick C. Klein </HL>
<DD> 08/18/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> Green Bay, Wis.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Anthony Dilweg's grandfather, Lavvie, starred at end on the championship Green Bay Packer teams of 1929, '30 and '31, and his dad, Robert, played for Marquette University in nearby Milwaukee. 
So one might think that the young man grew to 6-foot-3 tossing footballs in Bethesda, Md., and later at Duke University, pulsating for a chance to perform in the ancestral homeland. 

   Not quite. 

   "I was always a Washington Redskins fan, but Green Bay was my No. 2 team," says the candid rookie quarterback candidate at the summer camp of the National Football League entry. 
"I was glad to be drafted by the Packers, though. 
There was the family connection, of course, and I'd read the newspapers and knew I'd get a good shot at playing here." 

   The Pack is glad to have Dilweg, too, partly because being No. 2 in anyone's heart is better than the numbers that follow, and partly because the young man is smart enough to read the newspapers. 
The offense installed by Lindy Infante, the team's second-year coach, requires players who can run and think at the same time, a capacity lacking in a number of the lads he found when he arrived. 

   Infante, a professorial-looking fellow, is fond of saying that some members of his '88 Pack were bit a square in skull or stern for the round holes he wanted them to fill, and that the lack of fit contributed to the team's 4-12 won-lost record. 
But progress has been made, he avers, noting, "We whittled some edges, got some new people and got rid of some old ones." 

   He concludes: "We're ahead of where we were last year at this time, and we expect to stay that way. 
I'm not smart enough to predict records, but I definitely think we'll improve." 

   That would be good news in places other than this lakeside burg of 88,000 souls, because the Pack probably is a lot of people's second-favorite football team. 
Formed in 1919 and named for a local meat packer that supplied its jerseys, it joined the fledgling NFL in 1921, when the loop had franchises in cities instead of "markets" and included places like Canton, Ohio, Muncie, Ind., Rock Island, Ill., and Tonawanda, N.Y. 
It alone survives to carry the banner of small-town America in the councils of big-time American sports. 
For a while, the Pack not only belonged to the NFL, it ruled it. 
Its 11 league crowns are a record, and its five in the 1960s under coach Vince Lombardi -- in '61, '62, '65, '66 and '67 -- caused zealots to rename the place "Titletown, U.S.A." 
Alas, the gods reacted predictably to such hubris, and the Packers have had only four plus-.500 seasons since their last championship. 
They last made the playoffs in the strike-shortened 1982 campaign. 

   That folks here take their football seriously has never been in doubt; someone dispatched the dog of Dan Devine, the second of St. Vince's five successors, after a disappointing loss. 
They still turn out along the chain-link fence on Oneida Avenue, across from Lambeau Field, to watch the team huff through its summer labors, but expectations seem to have diminished. 
"Most people would be happy with a .500 record this year," remarked retiree B.P. Habeck. 
"We're not spoiled like we used to be." 

   Things would look a good deal brighter in Packerland if rookie offensive tackle Tony Mandarich were among the pre-season campers. 
At 6-foot-5 and 315 muscle-packed pounds, he's big enough to fill several holes of any shape, which is why the team made him its top choice in the last college-player draft, and the No. 2 pick overall. 

   Trouble is, the massive Mandarich also can read the papers. 
He read that the Dallas Cowboys are paying quarterback Troy Aikman, the only man drafted ahead of him, something like $2 million a year for six years, and says he regards the Pack's offer of less than half that amount annually an insult to himself, his loved ones and large and ferocious people everywhere. 
He says that unless the team pays up, he'll pump iron until he explodes. 

   For things to smile about, Packer faithful look first to their defense, which ranked seventh statistically among the NFL's 28 teams last year. 
The Green Bay leader there is Tim Harris, a fourth-year linebacker out of Memphis State and probably the best player not to make the last Pro Bowl team. 
His 13 1/2 sacks were fifth in the league, and he tackled Minnesota quarterback Wade Wilson for safeties in each of the two Packer wins over the favored Vikings that highlighted Green Bay's 1988 season. 

   Harris lends vocal as well as physical support to the Packer D, incessantly woofing at foes or exhorting mates to greater effort. 
"People ask if I ever shut up. 
I tell 'em no," he says. 
When you go 6-5 and 250, you can get away with that. 

   Infante made his coaching bones tutoring offenses in Cincinnati and Cleveland, and has installed here many of the techniques that were successful there. 
They involve using many formations, spreading the field with pass receivers, and allowing the quarterback to pick targets of opportunity. 

   Trouble is (again), Pack QBs have not, to date, resembled Ken Anderson or Bernie Kosar, Infante's Ohio foils. 
The Green Bay incumbent is Don Majkowski, a third-year man who is adjudged stronger of limb than of judgment. 
He says he spent the off-season watching films, and liked "Batman" best. 
That's a joke. 
He watched films of himself playing football, and believes his performance will benefit therefrom. 
If Majkowski falters, clever but weak-armed veteran Randy Wright will be in reserve, along, probably, with Dilweg. 
The rookie completed seven of 11 passes for 102 yards in the Pack's heartening, 28-27 win over the New York Jets in last week's preseason opener. 

   Other spots need packing, including running back and the defensive line. 
Infante acknowledges that his team lacks stars generally, and has called for volunteers among current hands. 
Nonetheless, he remains upbeat about its prospects. 

   "I want to win because I love living here. 
I have a three-minute commute to work, 2 1/2 minutes if I make the light," he says. 
He adds that the only special precaution he has taken has been to lock up his dog after losses. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
