ID: 167	RANK: 89	SCORE: 3.623482
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870807-0150 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 08/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   In this hottest of recent summers the National Football League is active on two fronts, neither of which have cool connotations. 
The first is the teams' annual training camps, where the pigskin pros are sweating, barfing and otherwise preparing themselves for the dehydration wards of nearby hospitals. 
The exertion that football requires is best suited to autumnal climes, but the notion of weather-based seasons for our popular sports has long since gone the way of the leather helmet. 

   The second front is centered in Washington, where labor-contract negotiations between the players' union and owner representatives were held this week. 
The union's shopping list includes loosening the fetters that keep its members from enjoying free agency, guaranteeing player contracts for their full duration, increasing pensions and eliminating artificial-turf fields (hooray!). 
Management is in favor of none of the above, and wants to get in a lick or two of its own, like the right to swoop down unexpectedly and test entire teams for drug use. 

   The present contract expires Aug. 31, two weeks before the regular season is to begin, and while I am not privy to the talks my hunch is that they will be resolved amicably. 
I say that because the level of public bombast between the sides has been low, and because the players would have arranged a July 31 strike deadline if they seriously contemplated walking out. 
I mean, why would they go through those miserable training camps of theirs without a season to look forward to? 

   It seems, however, that not everyone shares my optimism. 
Jonathan Sawyer, of Washington, D.C., says he has received between 1,000 and 2,000 letters from football fans who, anticipating the worst, say they are mad as hell and won't take it anymore. 
A few have gone so far as to say they'll take up watching (ugh!) hockey if the players hit the bricks in September the way they did in 1982. 

   Young Mr. Sawyer (he's 25 years old) is getting those letters because, in 1985, he and Eric Yaverbaum started something called Strikeback to provide fans with a way to let off steam about the threatened Major League baseball strike that year. 
They attracted some 80,000 missives, most of which called down plagues on the houses of both labor and management. 
The pair takes some credit for the fact that that strike lasted just two days. 
"Maybe we don't deserve any credit, but we'll take it anyway," Mr. Sawyer says. 

   "The baseball union and management people we contacted then were very supportive of us, except for Bobby Brown, the president of the American League, and Mark Belanger from the players' association," Mr. Sawyer recalls. 
"Brown told us, in effect, to buzz off, and Belanger said we didn't understand the issues. 
We didn't buzz off, and we told Belanger that if the ballplayers could understand 'em, we could, too. 
I think our mere presence did some good." 

   I must note here that Messrs. 
Sawyer and Yaverbaum's effort wasn't entirely disinterested. 
They are partners in a fledgling Washington public relations firm called Jericho Inc., (Jon + Eric=Jericho, get it?), and they saw the drive as a way to call attention to themselves as well as their cause. 

   Stories in some 100 newspapers and appearances on all three television-network morning news shows accomplished both purposes, and, perhaps, another as well. 

   "I was Phyllis George's last interview on CBS, although I can't recall saying anything that could have gotten her in trouble," notes Mr. Sawyer, ingenuously. 
Anyway, he says, "who cares if Eric and I had an ax to grind? 
We didn't cheat anybody. 
We even returned the $10,000 in checks people sent us because we weren't in it for that. 
I think it was a very wholesome activity." 

   That Strikeback is getting letters denouncing the possibility of a football players' walkout is significant, because it hasn't solicited them. 
Mr. Sawyer guesses that some people kept the address (152 11th St. SW, Washington, D.C. 20003) from '85 and used it again. 
Also significant, he believes, is their tone. 
"They're angrier than the ones we got before the baseball strike, and more pro-owner," he says. 
"Between all the drug stuff you read, and their higher salaries, the image of the pro athlete seems to have gone downhill in the last two years." 

   To be sure, the public's pro-management stance is to be expected in sports labor disputes because Joe Fan, not wishing to be deprived of his pleasures, shares the owners' goal of business as usual. 
I've always found it hard to work up sympathy for people who are so culturally impoverished that they can't bear to be without one dish on the huge sports smorgasbord for a few weeks. 
I remember the seven-week 1982 NFL strike fondly, as a time for Sunday puttering and family fun. 
I think the league should schedule two or three football-free Sundays every season. 

   That, of course, is not the position of Strikeback-founder Sawyer, a native of New York. 
"I'm an incredible Giants' fan, and the only person ever to sit in Section 314, Row 15, Seat 10 in Giants' Stadium for a Giants' game," he proclaims. 
"It runs in my family," he goes on. 
"The only time I ever saw my mother cry was in 1968, when Chris Hanburger of the Redskins stole the ball from the Giants' Ron Johnson -- after Johnson was down -- and ran for a TD." 
In other seasons, he's wild about the Mets, Knicks and Rangers. 

   He opines that while a football strike might score lower on the cosmic scale than one by, say, garbage collectors, the customer still has a right to be heard. 
"Big-time professional sports are a special kind of business," he asserts. 
"Teams use cities' names and, usually, taxpayer-financed stadiums. 
The teams and players both trade on the belief that they care more about winning for their fans than making a buck. 
Sure, it's an illusion, but if people didn't have illusions they'd stop rooting, and then where would sports be?" 

   Where, indeed? 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
