ID: 167	RANK: 95	SCORE: 3.601792
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870105-0038 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
Haunted by Brent Musburger
---
By George V. Higgins</HL>
<DD> 01/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   A week ago yesterday, Brent Musburger appeared to me in a dream. 
I think it was Mr. Musburger and that it was a dream -- I had the variety of this season's flu that precludes disobedience to higher authority (Mother) commanding that one take to bed; all I could manage was the occasional somnambulant excursion. 
During one of them I apparently turned on the television. 
I believe I saw a football team in New Jersey best a football team from Kansas City. 
Then I must have changed the channel, and that was when Mr. Musburger appeared to me. 
He was engaged in lighthearted conversation with a gentleman identified as Bill Parcells, employed by another football team that plays in New Jersey but insists it's from New York. 

   After that came a football game between the Washingtons and the Goats, who declare themselves Rams and come from California. 
The next day's papers -- not this one -- verified my suspicions that the Jets had beaten the Chiefs rather soundly, and the Redskins had indeed taken advantage of miscues, as I believe they are called, to trounce Los Angeles. 
I gave thanks for the return of consciousness, and thought no more of the matter. 

   Came New Year's Eve, and Mr. Musburger again appeared to me. 
A word of explanation here: I like to drive; I don't mind a drink now and again; I enjoy the company of cops. 
But Dec. 31 (Amateur Night) is not my idea of a good choice for combining those three activities, so I generally stay home or otherwise behave myself. 
That practice, as did Ebenezer Scrooge's undigested bit of meat, makes me vulnerable to visitations by the likes of CBS's Mr. Musburger (yes, I did have an option: ABC's Dick Clark. 
But Mr. Clark's threatened guests included Barry Manilow, and there's a history of diabetes in my family, so I never watch the fellow). 

   Mr. Musburger had changed his clothes. 
When he was bantering with Mr. Parcells last Sunday, he was wearing something blue, I think, and looked trig enough, to be sure. 
But now he had dressed himself up in a dinner jacket with a red bow tie and sash, plus a red scarf and a top hat -- he looked like a colorized Fred Astaire. 
He was standing on a veranda or something within view of Times Square -- which really is in New York, not New Jersey -- and he was breathlessly reporting the outcome of an event easily predicted: When midnight came, 1986 would be over and 1987 begin. 

   Mr. Musburger was assisted in that chore by many people. 
Gladys Knight and the Pips were indoors at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, also in Manhattan, where it was warm. 
They were obliged to revive several hundred people in evening attire who were repeatedly subjected to Glen Campbell's mistreatment of various songs. 
If Nelson Riddle's ghost heard Mr. Campbell's version of "All the Way," he will make Jacob Marley's look like Peter Pan. 
Having lost at least half an octave on the top end, Mr. Campbell endeavors to compensate by imitating Frank Sinatra's habit of adding marginalia to the lyrics. 
His amendments stress patriotism, and a sort of amorphous deism. 
Mr. Sinatra has been ailing lately, but he shouldn't worry about the competition. 

   From Florida, CBS provided an extended commercial for Disney World, featuring Mickey and Minnie Mouse, some chorus girls with more clothes and less talent than the Solid Gold Dancers, and Melba Moore with Freddie Jackson. 
A male duet calling themselves Air Supply replicated the vapid singing style of the falsetto Bee Gees. 
Ms. Moore and Mr. Jackson -- he richly caparisoned in a royal blue suit with a sparkling brooch at his throat and what looked like the cropped tail of Gene Autry's late horse, Champion, pinned between his shoulder blades -- sang songs about sex, I think it was, and implied they've had some mutual experiences along that line. 

   As midnight approached, Mr. Musburger turned sententious. 
He resolved to have artificial turf eliminated from National Football League stadiums. 
He lobbied for the appointment of a black as head coach of an NFL team. 
I don't think he can manage that. 
He declared his determination to have his family with him every New Year's Eve, as he did that night -- they all had silly hats, too, the supply of lamp shades evidently having run out, and they looked understandably uncomfortable. 
Mr. Musburger also took the opportunity to reveal his omniscience: Well before the chilly celebrants had evacuated Times Square, he disclosed that they had left behind 24 tons of litter, a fanciful figure he compared to the combined total weight of the (New Jersey) Giants football team as a segue into what was really a CBS commercial for the weekend football coverage. 

   There followed a rendition of "Auld Lang Syne" led by Ms. Knight and Mr. Campbell at the Waldorf. 
Robert Burns said he didn't write the lyrics; he merely copied them down as he heard them from the lips of an old Scottish singer. 
But his remains the definitive version, and it would be nice if those giving the anthem got the words right. 
Then came Air Supply at Disney World, escorted by Snow White. 
A particularly disgusting shot during their "Lost in Love" showed a young couple swapping spits in the foreground. 

   Mr. Musburger showed up at the Waldorf after midnight, hailed by Jerry Kravat's band playing "You've Got to Be a Football Hero," which I don't think he was. 
He told Ms. Knight the crowd in Times Square was liberally equipped with pocket TVs enabling them to watch Ms. Knight watching him watch them. 
The man has absolutely no shame. 

   ---
   There's a new battery commercial that begins with the announcement that, "There is a power in the universe." 
It turns out to be a Duracell. 
The year is still young, but that one has to have the early foot in the Bad Taste Awards for the year. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
