ID: 182	RANK: 36	SCORE: 5.866783
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870519-0096 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Hungry Enemy Within
---
By Ned Crabb</HL>
<DD> 05/19/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   A good half of this society is on a diet at any particular time, or so it would seem from the weekly short ton of advertising for weight-loss programs and spas. 

   Seems a lot of fuss and nonsense, not to mention heavy expense. 
I have an alternative, no-cost dieting plan based on military procedure and a siege mentality. 

   PERSONNEL: The brain, of course, is commander in chief -- all parts of the body report to it anyway. 
All personnel under Gen. Brain have equal status, with the rank of corporeal. 

   ENEMY: The alimentary system. 
Your first surprise, most likely, as you probably thought food was the enemy. 
No, it's mouth, esophagus, stomach and intestines, with their unrelenting demands, that constitute the foe. 
All other personnel -- cells, veins and arteries, blood, muscles, bones, tissue, et al. -- are of the body. 
The alimentary forces are not of the body -- they run right through the body's basically peaceful coalition like a blitzkrieg battalion, causing disruption, pain and ruin. 
However, as they are necessary for the body's nutrition and survival, they are an enemy to be subdued, not destroyed. 

   DAY 1: Begins with reveille, while corpus is still recumbent in barracks. 

   GEN. BRAIN: We have a war to fight. 
We're being surrounded by fat. 
Just what the "alimenies" want -- the more fat, the more food it takes to keep it there, the more the alimenies get to eat. 
Once that fat gets up here to your general, we're done for. 

   Starting today, we're on combat alert. 
We'll be limited to calories necessary to drive the body during the day's activities. 
The alimenies won't react at first, thinking it's the usual empty threat. 

   (Later that night, all personnel are at ease as body prepares for taps. 
Immediately after lights out, alimentary forces react: Stomach sends Gen. Brain an image of tomato-and-cheese pizza slices and a Whopper Junior; mouth adds signals of how great pizzas and Whoppers taste.) 

   GEN. BRAIN: Attention. 
Remain calm. 
This is a reconnaissance action only. 
The pizza had no anchovies and the Whopper was plain. 
Everyone go to sleep. 

   DAY 2: Because of the previous day's performance in the field, orders are not given until after reveille and breakfast of black coffee, juice and plain toast. 

   GEN. BRAIN: Attention all personnel. 
Now the tough get going. 
Casualty figures among tissue cells, especially in subcutaneous units, are expected to be high starting today and to increase daily as the war intensifies. 
Your sacrifice is for the good of all. 
Remember our battle cry: Totum Corpus non Obesitas! 

   (Early in the evening of Day 2, the alimentary forces, suspecting a major offensive, respond in kind: Stomach begins heavy contractions, intestines develop gas, mouth salivates at anything that's not cardboard, metal or wood. 
Body experiences pain and exhaustion; personnel begin to question war's necessity.) 

   GEN. BRAIN: Now hear this. 
Enemy action under way. 
We will respond with heavy ingestion of fruit juice, carrots and celery. 
Following ingestion, lights out. 

   DAY 3: Same breakfast as day before. 
The general has not spoken yet, but there is tension among all units. 

   GEN. BRAIN: Attention. 
This is your general. (Long, silent pause; all personnel, down to the tiniest squamous cells, are alert and anxious.) 
Last night at approximately 2300 hours, two creme-filled Devil Dogs penetrated our defenses and got into the system. 
Weigh-in will indicate previous day's gains were lost . . . or vice-versa. 
Full-force counteroffensive commences immediately. 
All units will receive rations of vegetables, whole grains, dried apricots and three quarts of water. 

   (By 1300 hours, fresh rations restore order to sucrose-intoxicated cells in subcutaneous units. 
But alimenies strike back at 1700 hours with dysentery. 
Body retreats to porcelain as internal battle rages.) 

   GEN. BRAIN: All units remain calm. 
Commence stabilizing maneuver. 

   (Alimenies demand Kentucky Fried Chicken extra crispy; they get pita bread, butter and bananas. 
Calorie count rises slightly, but maneuver stops dysentery.) 

   During the next few days, the corpus becomes battle-hardened as the alimenies shrink and as it realizes it can work and play just as well on 1,800 sensible calories as on 4,000 pleasurable ones. 
Once the alimenies are firmly neutralized, the commander in chief addresses his troops. 

   GEN. BRAIN: Never have so many been reduced to so few. 
But we must be constantly vigilant. 
It is springtime, and from back-yard barbecue pits and sidewalk cafes come the virulent vapors of frying fat. 
Our slender victory is ever weighed in the balance. 

   ---
   Mr. Crabb is an editor on the Journal's editorial-page staff. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
