ID: 182	RANK: 75	SCORE: 5.184153
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870506-0070 </DOCNO>
<HL> REAL ESTATE:
Proposal to Expand Protection
Of Coastal Lands Draws Fire
---
By William Celis III
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)
CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)
ENVIRONMENT (ENV)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<TEXT>
   DEVELOPERS WEREN'T HAPPY when Congress created the Coastal Barrier Resources System in 1982, providing protection to thousands of acres of undeveloped land along 667 miles of Atlantic Ocean and Gulf Coast shoreline. 
Now they have more to be unhappy about. 
The Interior Department is proposing to triple the amount of land included in the system to 1.5 million acres, and even some municipalities are complaining. 
Coastal communities assert that the proposed expansion, which would strike Gulf Coast states hardest, would erode local economies and tax bases. 

   "The opposition in Texas, for example, has been exceedingly heavy and vociferous," says Frank McGilvrey, an Interior Department official who is coordinator of the program. 
He is conducting public hearings on the expansion and expects to submit a plan to Congress this summer. 

   The Coastal Barrier Resources System was established both as a way to protect fragile coastal environments -- barrier islands at first and now adjacent wetlands -- and to keep federal money from being spent in places where the risks of erosion and hurricanes are high. 
Under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act of 1982, construction on land in the system isn't barred, but the areas are ineligible for federal flood insurance and subsidies that have in the past gone to developers and some cities to help build bridges, streets and sewers. 
"The taxpayer in Dubuque should not subsidize the developer who builds on shifting sands," says an Interior Department spokesman. 
The absence of federal assistance in itself has deterred construction on the islands because development consequently is a costly and risky venture. 

   THE POTENTIAL LOSS of federal aid has rankled some in coastal communities who claim the proposed expansion of the coastal barrier system could disrupt their towns' economic life. 
As an extreme example, values on one island off the coast of Beaufort, S.C., are said to have plummeted to $10,000 an acre after the island was included in the original system, down from as much as $100,000 an acre when the island wasn't affected by the coastal law. 

   Some communities, such as Corpus Christi, Texas, have succeeded in efforts to persuade the Interior Department to eliminate some acreage from its proposal, but not without immense effort. 
The South Texas Barrier Task Force spent more than a year documenting the economic loss that would result if North Padre Island and Mustang Island, portions of which lie in Corpus Christi's city limits, were included in the expanded system. 
The task force estimated a loss of more than $7 million a year in property taxes alone if the lands were included. 

   "These are the kinds of things that were not given any consideration by the Interior Department," says Ralph Durden, a Corpus Christi developer and president of Island Development Corp. Adds Linda Strong, chairwoman of the South Texas Barrier group and a Corpus Christi city councilwoman: "We have no quarrel with the system itself, but we feel that high-density development in small areas should occur rather than have development sprawled along the islands." 

   There are some areas, however, where the reaction to the Interior Department's plan is more restrained. 
Coastal areas of Northeast states, for example, are so developed that there's little in the way of barren acreage that needs protection. 
And in Florida, the fact that three sides of the state are surrounded by water has stirred little protest to the department's proposal to increase the amount of land in the system to 237,000 acres from the current 61,000. 
Florida developers assert that inclusion of more acreage only increases the value of the remaining shorefront property. 

   Says Thomas de Yambert, marketing vice president for Sundial Group Inc., a St. Petersburg development concern: "There's not a sense of loss." 


             Top Five States with Largest Acreage
             Increases in Coastal Barrier System
    STATE                CURRENT ACREAGE    TOTAL PROPOSED
                               IN SYSTEM
 1. Texas                        181,656           426,400
 2. Louisiana                     59,243           385,375
 3. Florida                       61,575           237,697
 4. Virginia                      11,298            84,892
 5. South Carolina                26,885            72,556
    Source: Interior Department
   ---
   FEARS OF SHARP INCREASES in apartment rents this year as a
result of the new federal tax law so far appear to be
groundless. On the contrary, according to Robert Sheehan,
vice president of Regis J. Sheehan &amp; Associates and the
consulting economist to the National Apartment Association,
apartment rents nationwide are likely to rise about 4% this
year. That would be off from an increase of just under 5% in
1986. Housing analysts say that apartment rentals are being
affected by the same problem afflicting commercial
properties: overbuilding.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
