ID: 90	RANK: 82	SCORE: 5.819253
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880516-0104 </DOCNO>
<HL> A Good Turner Deserves a Curtain Call </HL>
<AUTHOR> Harvey Gittler </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   At a concert recently, featuring a violin virtuoso and a piano accompanist, the virtuoso played beautifully and the accompanist was superb. 
The music critic for the local newspaper shared my views. 
But -- there is always a but. 

   Neither the program nor the critic's review mentioned the name of the young woman who turned the pages for the piano accompanist. 
She, too, was superb, performing a most difficult job; there were several passages where she had to turn the page back for a repeat of several lines of music. 
She performed that part of her work, as well as the regular page turning, with accuracy and brilliance. 
The accompanist didn't miss a single note! 

   Laugh if you wish, but I have turned pages for my wife, who plays the piano at small musicals here in town. 
And I can tell you that I'm an absolute nervous wreck every time she performs. 

   I have her practice the last two lines on each page, so I can learn exactly when to turn the page -- just one of the tricks to this trade that I've learned the hard way. 

   One day, just before she was to play, I met her piano teacher downtown and told him how nervous I was. 
He then "regaled" me with some stories that kept me up all night. 
Once, he said, the page turner at a professional concert knocked over the whole score, causing a crescendo where none was intended. 
Another time, he recalled, the page turner flipped two pages at once, causing all hell to break loose as the violinist was playing on one page and the accompanist was on another page. 

   Upon hearing these stories, I rushed home and took my wife's piano score in hand. 
I put a raised paper clip at the top of each page, staggered, so that I would turn only one page at a time. 
Even then, I was more nervous than my wife was when she performed. 

   Unfortunately, page turning is not about to be mechanized in the manner of pin setting in bowling alleys. 
Nor do I foresee the day when accompanists will read scores projected on music stands by teleprompters. 
Some things in life are destined to remain the province of mere mortals. 

   All of which leads me to think about forming an organization I would call the American Society for the Appreciation of Page Turners -- ASAPT. 
Once I get this society -- perhaps it will be a union -- moving, we're going to put some demands on the impresarios of concerts. 

   Our first demand would be that the page turner's name be listed in the program along with the main artist and the accompanist. 
Why should the page turner remain anonymous? 

   Our second demand would be that the page turner be allowed to take at least one bow along with the main artist and the accompanist at the end of the concert. 
After all, it was the trio, not the duo, that made the concert successful. 

   Our third and last demand would be that the page turner be allowed to take a solo bow. 
He or she is worthy of such recognition. 

   Perhaps I can persuade the Oberlin College Conservatory, in the town where I live, to give a course in page turning. 
I would write the syllabus and offer my services as the first Professor of Page Turning. 
In time, upon retirement, I could become The Most Distinguished Emeritus Professor of Page Turning -- another first for Oberlin College. 

   And once ASAPT gets into full swing, the concert world is going to know quickly of our demands. 
If our demands are not met, well then you accompanists can just damn well turn your own pages and see how you like it. 

   ---
   Mr. Gittler, of Oberlin, Ohio, writes and lectures on management. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
