ID: 215	RANK: 50	SCORE: 10.478145
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870112-0039 </DOCNO>
<HL> Telephone Ads
Create 'Brands'
Of Local Calls
---
By Johnnie L. Roberts
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> NYN AIT PAC
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   New Yorkers these days are more apt to place "what's up" calls and "check-in" calls to nearby friends and family. 
Chicagoans are more likely to make "phone first" calls before running errands. 

   The reason isn't merely a sudden collective urge to stay in touch. 
Rather, the rise in such phone use is the fruit of efforts by New York Telephone Co. and Illinois Bell Telephone Co., which along with California's Pacific Bell Telephone Co. are using specially targeted advertising to pep up local calling. 

   The companies are creating "brands" of calls and pitching them like soap. 
New York Telephone's ads include one designed to stimulate local business calling. 

   "We can't create people for them to call, but we can create reasons for them to call the people they already know," says Louis Kruh, New York Telephone's director of sales advertising. 

   While a common practice in the long-distance market, advertising to boost usage is fairly new to local calling, and an outgrowth of telecommunications deregulation. 
Since the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, long-distance rates have shrunk and, with them, the subsidy they provided for keeping down the price of local service. 
The result: "We need to pump up some of the people's bills to help subsidize the loss leader of local telephone service," says Harriet Norris, New York Telephone's director of corporate advertising. 

   The efforts are centered in Chicago, New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and seven other California cities, places where so-called local measured service is pervasive. 
Unlike flat-rate service -- which provides unlimited calling for a set monthly fee -- measured service requires customers to pay for local calls on a usage basis. 
"Every time they pick up the phone they pay for it, much like when you turn on the light in the house," Ms. Norris says. 

   So far, the campaigns appear to be working. 
Illinois Bell, for example, says that its test marketing indicates a 5% to 10% increase in calling volume as a result of its year-old advertising campaign. 
And telephone-company marketers says that for each dollar spent on such advertising by the companies, $3 to $7 is being generated from increased local calling. 

   In the ads, the phone companies and their ad agencies treat local calls much like any consumable product. 
"I believe that this is no different than if we are marketing some other product -- shampoo is an example," says Kenneth Yednock, a vice president of N.W. Ayer Inc., Illinois Bell's ad agency. 
"The purpose of advertising is to stimulate excess usage of anything." 

   New York Telephone and its ad agency, Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., have gone the furthest in pitching "brands" of calls. 
The phone company says that the ads' creators even borrowed ideas from greeting cards to compile its extensive brand line. 

   Among these are the "thank you" call, the "don't be lonely" call, the "don't feel guilty" call and the "good wishes" call. 
One TV commercial begins with a voice announcing "New York Telephone presents the 'feel better' call" as the phrase is superimposed on the screen. 
A tight shot appears of a man who phones his girlfriend to smooth over an earlier spat. 
In the midst of the ad, the voice interjects, "With New York Telephone's low rates, peace talks don't cost much at all." 

   With another commercial, New York Telephone is encouraging local calling among businesses. 
The ad shows a salesman who freezes over in the presence of a client who gives him the cold shoulder. 
The client's aloof mien shows he feels neglected because the salesman hasn't been attentive to his needs. 
An announcer says: "Next time, stay in touch with New York Telephone. . . . 
You can make your regular sales calls and that extra call." 

   Such ads are aimed at "callers" rather than "callees," says Young &amp; Rubicam's Katherine Schneider, who supervises the New York Telephone account. 
In contrast to the more passive callees, she explains, "the caller-type personality is a person who takes the initiative, is expressive and values his personal relationships." 

   One of Illinois Bell's "phone first" ads features a harried shopper rushing from one hardware store to the next in an unsuccessful search for plumbing materials. 
"To avoid a hassle," the accompanying jingles advises, "phone first." 

   Illinois Bell also has a series of "just call" ads, which recommend local calling as way to minimize worry. 
In one, anxious parents await their son's return home at night. 
When he finally arrives, the stern-faced father meets him at the door with the admonition "just call the next time." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
