ID: 215	RANK: 67	SCORE: 10.051525
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871016-0073 </DOCNO>
<HL> U S West, Newspaper Group Offer Plan
For Phone Firms to Wholesale Services
---
By Bob Davis and Johnnie L. Roberts
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/16/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AIT T
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   U S West Inc. and a group of newspaper publishers proposed that telephone companies should be able to provide voice storage and electronic mail services on a wholesale basis, a more narrow approach than that favored by most other telephone companies. 

   The proposal by the Englewood, Colo.-based Bell concern and the American Newspaper Publishers Association, if adopted, would expand the telephone companies into providing electronic messaging services. 

   But the position splits U S West from the other regional telephone companies by limiting the role of telephone companies in providing electronic messaging services to that of a wholesaler-storing voice or text messages in central computers for later delivery. 
Under the proposal, other information vendors would acquire the services from telephone companies for resale to consumers. 

   Other regional phone companies criticized the proposal. 
"We can't agree with the wholesale approach," said Arthur C. Latno Jr., Pacific Telesis Group's executive vice president. 
"Very simply, we believe we are in the best position to provide messaging services to the greatest number of consumers at the lowest price." 

   The newspaper publishers and U S West proposal was made in a filing with federal Judge Harold Greene, who oversees compliance with terms of the Bell system breakup. 
Last month, Judge Greene said the Baby Bells should continue to be banned from making telephone equipment and providing long-distance telephone service. 
He also continued to block them from providing electronic information services, but said he would permit them to transmit such services provided by other companies. 

   The court invited interested parties to file comments suggesting how information service businesses might be structured, and how telephone companies might handle such transmissions without getting in the business directly. 

   U S West's willingness to join with the newspaper trade group is significant because until now the publishers have successfully blocked telephone companies from taking a major role in the electronic information industry. 

   ANPA, the newspaper association, said that it had negotiated for many months with U S West, other regional phone companies and information service providers. 
U S West, ANPA, the Magazine Publishers Association, and the National Association of Broadcasters all filed the same proposed order with Judge Greene. 

   By working with the publishers, US West also could neutralize one of the most potent lobbying forces on Capitol Hill. 

   Judge Greene has long accorded newspaper publishers special consideration in telephone matters. 
In the original consent decree that broke up American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. in January 1984, he specifically barred AT&amp;T and its offspring from offering electronic yellow pages, which could compete with classified newspaper advertisements. 
In his most recent order last month, Judge Greene largely confirmed the ban. 

   George Wilson, chairman of ANPA and president of the Concord, N.H., Monitor, said the order proposed to Judge Greene would "start the wheels rolling toward more diverse electronic information services." 

   The Justice Department, in its filing, urged Judge Greene to give the regional companies a larger role than the one envisioned by U S West. 
The agency recommended "maximum flexibility" for the phone companies, including the ability to offer services that would store and send data and voice messages between consumers. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
