ID: 151	RANK: 85	SCORE: 23.228668
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880125-0160 </DOCNO>
<HL> Comex Weighs New Diamond Contract But Is Finding Considerable Opposition </HL>
<AUTHOR> William Power (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> DBRSY </CO>
<IN> SCR CMD PCS </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The Commodity Exchange is pursuing the development of a diamond futures contract, an idea that infuriates some manufacturers and dealers. 

   If it goes forward, the Comex would be the world's only exchange to trade diamonds as exchanges already trade hogs, pork bellies, crude oil, gold and other commodities. 
The development could change wholesale and even retail diamond pricing. 

   But the Comex, resurrecting an idea that was studied in London in 1985 and was tried briefly in the U.S. a decade before that, faces technical and political problems. 

   Teaming with Martin Rapaport -- a maverick diamond broker who since 1978 has rankled dealers by publishing a weekly "price list" of wholesale diamond values -- the Comex has issued a seven-page contract proposal and is soliciting comments and suggestions. 
An application to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission isn't expected before fall. 

   Diamonds are "sexy," Mr. Rapaport maintains. 
But he says they need to be "brought down from the clouds" and traded like other precious commodities. 

   Others don't agree. 
"Most of us in the diamond industry aren't in favor of the use of diamonds as an investment commodity," says Lloyd Jaffe, chairman of the American Diamond Industry Association, a trade group. 
"We see no economic need for (a futures contract), and it could very easily create speculative fever." 
Privately, some of Mr. Jaffe's colleagues use much harsher language. 

   Diamonds aren't like other commodities or financial instruments, argues Mr. Jaffe. 
"Two shares of a given company's stock are alike. 
Two copies of a dollar bill are alike. 
But two diamonds are not alike," he says. 
It's "improper," he adds, to group diamonds into the quality and price categories that a futures contract requires. 

   The 54-year-old Comex is the country's premier market for gold, silver and copper futures. 
It also once traded such things as hides, rubber, silk and tin. 

   The Comex's proposed contract will consist of 10 round brilliant-cut diamonds, of certain color and clarity, each a minimum of 1.01 carat. 
A carat equals 1/142 of an ounce. 
By comparison, each Comex gold contract calls for the receipt or delivery of 100 troy ounces of gold; each copper contract, 25,000 pounds of copper. 

   Paul Bialo, president of the 250-member Diamond Manufacturers and Importers Association of America, a major trade organization, says the problem is that it'll be "almost impossible" to put together enough diamonds in the narrow range of the proposed contract. 
He also worries that the "pipeline" of diamonds -- from the uncut stage, through manufacturers, to the jewelry store -- will be "destroyed" if people start buying diamonds on a futures exchange instead. 

   People at a recent meeting between Terrence F. Martell, Comex's senior vice president for marketing, and about 80 members of Mr. Bialo's association "practically came to blows" because of opposition to futures, says Mr. Bialo, who was there. 
"It was rough, let me tell you." 

   Mr. Martell stresses that the diamond idea is only at a preliminary stage. 
But his teammate, Mr. Rapaport, concedes that selling the idea to the industry will be difficult. 
"People are afraid of it because they don't know it," he says. 

   Another reason for opposition is that many members of the close-knit, sometimes secretive diamond trade already dislike the 36-year-old Mr. Rapaport for the price list he publishes. 
Diamond cutters and wholesalers say the list leads buyers to expect prohibitively lower prices, though many jewelry stores love having it. 

   One of the main things that disturbs the diamond trade about the futures idea is the chance for wide price swings caused by speculators playing it for profit. 
Mr. Rapaport, though, says there's already speculation in the industry. 

   He maintains that a futures contract will protect the public by establishing a guaranteed standard of diamond quality. 
He envisions the Comex as a "beacon of light" instantly reflecting price trends that retailers and consumers should know about, "reducing the opportunity for fraud." 

   Specifically, Mr. Rapaport says, futures would help the industry better absorb price-related moves made by South Africa's De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., whose London-based cartel, the Central Selling Organization, controls 85% of the world market for rough diamonds. 

   For example, an average 10% price increase, announced by De Beers last October, is still filtering through the industry from the wholesale to retail level. 
But with a futures market, such a boost would be reflected immediately -- reducing the industry hoarding that can take place between the time a price rise is rumored and when it finally reaches the retail level, Mr. Rapaport says. 

   De Beers says it won't support futures. 
"There are a number of problems associated with this. 
It would need a fairly drastic fluctuation in prices to be of use to anybody," says Andrew Lamont, a De Beers spokesman in London. 
He adds: "We firmly believe that diamonds should be found in diamond jewelry," not on a futures exchange. 

   According to Mr. Rapaport, loyalty to De Beers is part of the reason some manufacturers and dealers are wary of the futures idea. 
Diamond futures would clearly reduce the market power of the De Beers cartel, just as the launching of crude oil futures sapped some of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' power. 
It "democratizes the diamond industry to a certain degree," Mr. Rapaport says. 

   Mr. Rapaport rejects the argument that because no two diamonds are alike, it'll be impossible to maintain an orderly market of comparable-quality stones. 

   "Are all bonds exactly the same?" he asks. 
"Are all pork bellies exactly the same? 
No. 
But there's a certain range (of diamonds) that is acceptable and a certain minimal quality that Comex will accept." 

   That doesn't convince Mr. Bialo, who makes no secret that he prefers none of the manufacturers and importers in his group participate in a futures market. 
Diamonds, Mr. Bialo says, "cannot be traded as a financial instrument." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
