ID: 151	RANK: 91	SCORE: 22.662857
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870807-0129 </DOCNO>
<HL> Groups Don't Need
To Own Trademark
To Sue, Court Rules
---
Diamond Trade Association
Had Cited Retailer Using
De Beers Name in Ads
---
By Michael Siconolfi
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DBRSY
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Trade groups don't need to own a trademark to sue for infringement, a federal appeals court ruled. 

   In a unusual decision, the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington, D.C., said Jewelers Vigilance Committee Inc., a New York-based nonprofit trade association for the diamond industry, has the right to sue a diamond retailer using the name "De Beers" for trademark infringement. 
In most trademark cases, the plaintiff holds a proprietary interest in the mark it is seeking to protect. 

   Even though Jewelers Vigilance doesn't own the De Beers trademark, many of the trade group's 2,500 members buy diamonds through De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the South African concern that controls 80% of the world's uncut-diamond market. 

   The court's decision has broad significance for trade groups, trademark lawyers said. 
The ruling, which overturned a federal administrative order, is particularly important because the federal appellate court is widely cited in the trademark field and is perceived to have a tremendous amount of expertise in the area, trademark lawyers said. 

   Michael Platt, an attorney for Ullenberg Corp., the Chattanooga, Tenn., diamond retailer accused of infringement, called the decision "very disruptive." 

   Mr. Platt said "traditionally, it has always been the right of the owner to assert when or whether its mark is used." 

   However, the decision won't be appealed, he said, because it is a "preliminary battle" in the case. 

   The trade group's lawyers hailed the ruling. 
"The court indicated it will look favorably on trade associations that perform a watchdog function by taking an active role in attempting to put a halt to unfair competitive practices," said Roberta Jacobs Meadway, a trademark attorney at Panitch Schwarze Jacobs &amp; Nadel in Philadelphia and outside counsel for Jewelers Vigilance. 

   Jewelers Vigilance three years ago accused Ullenberg of improperly using the De Beers name in its advertising. 
Ullenberg said in administrative proceedings at the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office that it had no direct business dealings with De Beers. 

   The firm has used the De Beers name in its ads since 1964, said Ronald Ullenberg, president. 
"It's not like it's a secret; we're not hiding anything," he said. 
Mr. Ullenberg said using the name isn't misleading because his firm offers finished diamonds, not the uncut stones DeBeers sells. 

   "We don't buy rough diamonds," he said. 

   The Trademark Trial and Appeal Board, in Arlington, Va., threw out the case in April 1986, ruling that the trade group had failed to establish the right to sue. 

   However, a three-judge panel of the appellate court, in a decision written by Circuit Judge Jean Galloway Bissell, said Jewelers Vigilance "is more than a meddlesome party" in the trademark dispute. 

   As distributors of De Beers diamonds using the name to promote its goods, the trade group's members "have personal interests in continuing such use and in negating Ullenberg's assertion of exclusive rights in the mark De Beers," the court said. 

   The case was returned to the trademark board for further proceedings consistent with the opinion. 

   Trademark lawyers said the case has been closely watched by the parties in a separate lawsuit filed against Ullenberg by Tiara Corp., an Evanston, Ill.-based jewelry maker, who alleged unfair trade practices because of improper use of the De Beers name. 
Ullenberg has denied the allegations made in the suit, filed in federal district court in Chicago. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
