ID: 220	RANK: 19	SCORE: 21.749174
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890807-0105 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890807 </DD>
<AN> 890807-0105. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
@  Unliberating Memories
@  ----
@  By Martha Bayles </HL>
<DD> 08/07/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<TEXT>
   Against a pulsating geometric background, a cartoon dove perches on a guitar. 
Both shapes swirl with psychedelic hues to the snarl of electronic feedback. 
The graphic is by Peter Max, the music is by Jimi Hendrix, and the purpose is to introduce a "Woodstock Minute" on MTV. Consisting of clips from the Warner Bros. movie "Woodstock" (airing on both MTV and its sister channel, VH-1, Aug. 6-17) and of micro-interviews with some of the performers, these snippets have been airing since May. 

   Apparently, their purpose is educational, like the "We the People" snippets CBS aired during the Bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution. 
It's too late -- and too painful -- to contemplate what CBS did to the Constitution. 
But it's not too late to contemplate the wisdom of entrusting the troubled, complex history of the 1960s to a cable network that sent out a press release saying, "It was the summer of '69. 
Lyndon Johnson was in the White House." 

   When I mentioned this error to an MTV publicist, she explained, with some embarrassment, that the people writing the press releases were "very young." 
"Either that or they were at Woodstock," I quipped, offering a variation on the current joke: If you can remember the 1960s, then you weren't really part of what was happening. 

   Most of us can remember that Richard Nixon was in the White House during the summer of '69 -- the same year that U.S. troops in Vietnam peaked at 550,000, a figure not far off the 500,000 who gathered on that hillside in Bethel, N.Y., for the mid-August Woodstock Music and Art Fair: An Aquarian Exposition. 
We can also place Woodstock on a descending curve of countercultural "be-ins," from the blissed-out Monterey Pop Festival in 1967 to the bottomed-out Rolling Stones concert in Altamont in December 1969. 

   But the joke touches a nerve. 
In a way, the 1960s generation deserves to see its own past cut down to film clips and glib quips, because it did practically the same thing to the past it inherited. 
Most people at Woodstock were middle class and semi-educated; their poor and working-class counterparts were too busy fighting, supporting or surviving the Vietnam War to dabble in Hermann Hesse and Herbert Marcuse. 
Yet the ideas the Woodstockians were "into" were astoundingly superficial. 

   They were into romanticism. 
They abandoned their cars, hiked to the festival, and cheered when the New York State Thruway (that symbol of modern industrial society) was closed down. 
When it rained, they stripped naked and let the downpour rinse their grubby bodies. 
When it got hot, they skinny-dipped and had sexual intercourse in the water, in the grass, in the mud and in public. 
They went back to nature and deposited 600 acres of garbage. 

   They were into socialism. 
They came without tickets, crashed the gate, and cheered when the investors announced that they were "taking a bath" to make it "a free concert." 
In fact, they had already gotten their money back from the sale of film and record rights. 
The Woodstockians believed that their "nation" was a viable alternative to "the system" -- even though the festival's food, water and medical care had to be donated by the local townspeople and the military. 

   They were into transcendence. 
They tried yoga, they quoted Carlos Castaneda. 
When Sly Stone led them in "I Want to Take You Higher," he knew as an ex-gospel singer that he was borrowing the music of the black church. 
But the crowd didn't. 
It thought its ecstasy came from something generically called "rock 'n' roll," enhanced by smoking a joint or dropping a tab of acid. 
And despite all the bad trips and the ugly deaths that followed Woodstock, many went on believing that loud music and drug abuse were the path to Nirvana. 

   Romanticism, socialism, transcendence -- even at Woodstock, these ideas were deemed "heavy," due to the historical and cultural weight they carried. 
But 1960s youths believed they could jettison the weight and still grasp the ideas. 
For them, history was like Alice's Restaurant, a place where "you can get anything you want" without really having to pay for it. 

   This casual appropriation of serious ideas is one reason why it's so hard to talk about the 1960s without being either too serious or too casual. 
On the one hand, the pop-cultural scholar who traces the influence of Martin Hiedegger on John Lennon's lyrics ought to lighten up. 
On the other hand, the post-modernist MTV film editor who Cuisinarts the 1960s along with the rest of human history ought to read a good book. 

   Or a slightly nutty book, like "The Rainbow," by D.H. Lawrence. 
In connection with Woodstock, let me recommend an excellent film version of this odd but powerful novel. 
Beginning Saturday night, this three-hour BBC production continues Aug. 12 and 19 (9-10 p.m. and 1-2 a.m. EDT, on A&amp;E). 
Not to be confused with Ken Russell's lurid theatrical film with the same title, this TV version of "The Rainbow" is simply the best screen adaptation of Lawrence I've ever seen. 

   The connection with Woodstock? 
The main character, Ursula Brangwen (Imogen Stubbs) craves both passion and liberation. 
The film improves on Lawrence by trimming the rhetoric and more effectively dramatizing key scenes: Ursula stripping naked to commune with nature; Ursula striding through a grim coal mine to denounce "the system"; Ursula running across a moonlit hillside to free her imprisoned spirit. 
Clearly this is a girl who would not have been out of place at Woodstock. 

   Or would she have been? 
The trouble with Lawrence's ideas is that he never made them jibe with the ordinary demands of social life. 
He never had to, because he never imagined the sound of 500,000 voices yelling the F-word in unison with Country Joe and the Fish. 
For us, however, there's a lesson in Woodstock. 
The next time we feel seduced by some fevered rhetoric about the need to exalt blind instinct over oppressive reason, consider the difference between one naked girl on a moonlit hillside and several thousand naked girls on a moonlit hillside. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
