ID: 220	RANK: 36	SCORE: 16.645527
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890817-0076 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890817 </DD>
<AN> 890817-0076. </AN>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
@  Bad Acid </HL>
<DD> 08/17/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<TEXT>
   We stand in awe of the Woodstock generation's ability to be unceasingly fascinated by the subject of itself. 
One would have thought the saturation coverage at the time would have been enough. 
But every five years Woodstock-goers, so many of whom have become writers for elite media organs, wheel out their gilded memories and pet observations. 

   It's even more remarkable that other generations are willing to give the boomers all this attention. 
The elder generations helped create the excesses of the '60s by indulging the teen-agers of the era. 
Somehow grown-ups believed that wisdom adhered to youth, and that it was necessary to "get in touch with the young." 
Life and Look magazines opened their pages. 
The New York Times was somber and celebratory, calling Woodstock a "Phenomenon of Innocence." 
This obeisance encouraged all that talk about Revolution, the Age of Aquarius and yippiedom. 

   Today, the younger generation seems also to have become vicarious flower children. 
Woodstock nostalgia seems strongest among those who are 14. 
MTV, which caters to early adolescents, has been going bananas with "Woodstock Minutes" and the like. 
An audience of teen-age boys naturally likes the idea of running around with naked women and doing LSD while listening to Hendrix and The Who. 
Woodstock also offers a forum for vague rebelliousness. 
That's perfect for today's teens, many of whom would like to be radical, even though they don't have any definite politics. 

   Today's renegades should remember that Woodstock was about drugs, and that without drugs, it wasn't much fun. 
They should also know that all the talk about freedom and individuality at Woodstock was a lie. 
The Woodstock radicals were intolerant of individuality. 
There was a rigid dress code (jeans, no short hair). 
There was a rigid vocabulary code. 
There was a rigid thought code. 
There was peer pressure to be part of the drug scene; people who didn't do drugs often were afraid to admit it. 
There was intense peer pressure, especially on women, to be promiscuous. 
A remark in a recent Woodstock column by the New York Post's Pete Hamill captures the attitude toward women. 
He is describing what a wonderful time his male buddies had: "They joined together and bathed nude in Mr. Filippini's pond. 
They shared food and joints and girlfriends." 

   This year's cliche about Woodstock is that the kids came to Woodstock as renegades and left as a market. 
Rock is now commercial. 
Rebellion is an advertising gimmick. 
The heroes of Woodstock now ride the nostalgia circuit. 
As Wavy Gravy recently put it, "Woodstock was created for wallets." 
Mainstream commercial culture has indeed assimilated the counterculture. 
But mainstream culture had to meet it halfway. 

   What mainstream culture absorbed, at least during the '70s, was a whiff of Woodstock's utopianism, the idea that you could have drugs as well as wisdom, promiscuity as well as relationships, organization without structure, prosperity without economic competition. 
There was a spiritual greed in the desire to have all these things; the older name for it is hedonism. 

   The Woodstock radicals couldn't have been expected to realize that hedonism can damage the social fabric. 
Their elders should have told them. 
Those whom they would have listened to did not, and the social fabric was damaged. 
It's impossible to link definitively the counterculture to today's social pathologies. 
But the late '60s and early '70s brought a number of terrible trends that now haunt us. 
Drug abuse rose dramatically. 
The divorce rate went up. 
Promiscuity rose. 
Men felt less compelled to take responsibility for the children they helped create. 
Schools became more disorderly. 
The universities became refuges for frustrated radicals. 
The poverty rate, which had been dropping, went up. 

   Today, most Woodstock veterans acknowledge that the hedonism was excessive. 
But today's nostalgic treatments are still largely self-aggrandizing. 
Many celebrate Woodstock as the Last Good Time. 
It would be more appropriate if there were a hint of shame, if not over the damage that was done to the idea of individual responsibility, at least over the deaths that resulted in part from the countercultural life style. 

   Twenty-seven acts played at Woodstock. 
Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, Tim Hardin, Keith Moon and Paul Butterfield subsequently died from drug overdoses. 
Bob Hite from Canned Heat later died of a drug-related heart attack and Ron McKernan of the Grateful Dead died of a liver ailment. 
Richard Manuel of The Band and Abbie Hoffman were suicides. 
Felix Pappalardi of Mountain was shot by his wife. 

   It wasn't only the famous who died. 
We were struck by a message in the current issue of Life from Pat Reul Malone, a secretary in Monroe, N.Y: "I am writing this in memory of my dear brother, James M. Berra, who went to Woodstock with three friends. 
James died at the age of 26 on February 11, 1978, from a drug overdose. 
Two others also died of drug overdoses. 
Only one person of the four survives." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
