ID: 220	RANK: 94	SCORE: 10.605272
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870210-0116 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Designer Wind Chimes for Montgomery's Courthouse
---
By Barbara Jepson</HL>
<DD> 02/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Montgomery, Ala.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The rain quickens its tempo as instrument designer Garry Kvistad finishes installing a 6 1/2-foot set of wind chimes at the new County Courthouse and Detention Facility here. 
Onlookers wait eagerly under hard hats and umbrellas for a stiff breeze to activate the chimes. 

   Fifteen minutes later, they are still waiting. 
"If you all want to make those tubes dance," volunteers a construction worker at the site, "I'll go get my rifle out of the truck." 

   But the unpredictable nature of wind chimes is part of their appeal. 
"They're not mechanical," says Mr. Kvistad, who suspended the six anodized aluminum chimes, a circular clapper and a bright red windcatcher from a 21-foot steel frame erected on the grounds between the two buildings. 
"It would drive people crazy if they played all the time." 

   Subsequent visits to the complex showed that, depending on wind velocity, the sound ranges from a delicate tinkling to a bell-like serenade with a rich accompaniment of overtones. 
"No two phrases are ever identical," insists the bearded, black-haired instrument designer, "because you also have rhythm and intensity varying the sound. 
For something so simple, there's a lot of complexity coming out of it." 

   The courthouse chimes are essentially an oversized version of the Woodstock Windchimes made by Woodstock Percussion Inc., which 37-year-old Mr. Kvistad founded in 1979 with his wife, Diane. 
Their standard chimes, sold in gift shops in the U.S. and abroad, are tuned to one of three pentatonic (five-tone) scales. 

   The subtly Oriental "Lun" commemorates an ancient Chinese court musician. 
The tranquil, melancholy "Olympos" is named after a flute and lyre player in ancient Greece. 
And the buoyant "Partch" apparently honors a microtonal system of tuning invented by 20th-century American composer Harry Partch. 
Curiously, the Partch chime has only one note in common with the 43-note Partch octave. 
And to my ears, the Partch is less appealing than the other two chime tunings. 

   All three tunings are, however, remarkably pure in a technical sense, thanks to Mr. Kvistad's training in physics, metallurgy and woodworking at Northern Illinois University. 
To monitor the precision of his manufacturing process, he wrote a software program that oversees the fabrication of aluminum tubing to within thirty thousandths of an inch of the thickness that will produce correct pitch. 
Further minute adjustments are accomplished with an electronic tuning device. 

   Woodstock Percussion has grown from a small operation headquartered in the kitchen and barn of the Kvistads' farmhouse to a company in West Hurley, N.Y., that employs 45 workers at a 16,000-square-foot factory. 
Mr. Kvistad says his gross sales were $2 million last year, up 500% from 1983. 

   When Mr. Kvistad appeared on National Public Radio's "All Things Considered," almost 1,000 listeners put in orders. 
One of them was John Gandy of Pearson, Humphries, Jones and Associates, the Montgomery architects for the County Courthouse and Detention Facility. 

   When Mr. Gandy finished designing the buildings, he searched for something more distinctive than the usual fountain to embellish the site. 
"I hope the wind chimes will ultimately become associated with the courthouse," says the gray-haired architect in a deep southern drawl, "the way Big Ben is associated with London." 

   That may take some doing. 
Right now, the $18-million courthouse project is linked in the minds of local voters with costly construction problems and a coming three-cent gasoline tax that will raise money to pay for them. 

   In 1983, nearly two years after work began, the primary contractor went bankrupt, after failing to correct numerous construction flaws or to pay his suppliers. 
A new contractor resumed work last year, and the project is scheduled for completion next month. 

   Perhaps the soothing effect ascribed to the "Olympos" tuning of the courthouse chimes will restore serenity to the site. 
Even now, the "Peace Pipes" (named in honor of Martin Luther King, who preached at Montgomery's Ebenezer Baptist Church) are a monumental, anchoring presence. 
Mr. Kvistad has come a long way from his early experiments with tubes cannibalized from aluminum lawn chairs in his backyard. 

   In those days, he was no industrialist, just a percussionist fiddling around. 
Today, other musicians, from rockers to classical performers, from The Grateful Dead to the avant-garde Kronos Quartet, use Mr. Kvistad's wind chimes. 
New York composer Brian Fennelly's score for his "Thoreau Fantasy No. 2," premiered last February by the Hudson Valley Philharmonic, even calls for a battery of Woodstock Windchimes in its delicate finale. 
"My stepdaughter gave me a set for Christmas one year," explains the composer, "and I was impressed by their high quality." 

   Having fulfilled his goal of ". . . making enough money to do exactly what I want as a percussionist" -- which currently involves playing with Steve Reich and Musicians -- Mr. Kvistad now envisions larger projects. 
He dreams of hanging one of his instruments from the Washington Monument, or installing mammoth wind chimes of 12-inch diameter at public sites throughout the country. 

   "In a quaint European village," he observes, "bells are so important. 
They tell you the hour and play on holidays. 
In our culture, electronics have taken over so much that we've lost the acoustic aspect of the bell. 
To my way of thinking, wind chimes are a step toward bringing back harmonious sounds in our communities." 

   ---
   Ms. Jepson is a free-lance music writer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
