ID: 129	RANK: 80	SCORE: 8.300838
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880318-0154 </DOCNO>
<HL> When Cabbage Patch Wilts, Sow Lettuce --- Coleco Pins Its Hopes On Debt Restructuring </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joseph Pereira (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> CLO </CO>
<TEXT>
   At Coleco Industries Inc.'s annual meeting last May, Arnold Greenberg, chairman and chief executive officer, confidently predicted that the toy maker would post a profit in 1987. 

   He was off, by a lot. 
Instead of a profit, Coleco reported a loss of $105.4 million for the year. 
Estimates, it explained, were off. 

   Just two years after posting record sales and profit -- thanks to the wildly successful Cabbage Patch Kids -- the nation's fifth-largest toy company is in trouble. 
Unless debenture holders accept a restructuring plan that eases the company's heavy debt burden, Coleco says, it will miss interest payments and face the specter of filing for bankruptcy-court protection. 

   What went wrong? 

   For Coleco, it's an all-too-familiar boom-to-bust story. 
The company has failed to come up with any hit toys successful enough to replace Cabbage Patch Kids, its mid-1980s megahit, sales of which have plummeted in the past two years. 
An ambitious and expensive diversification plan has failed to pay off yet. 
And, because of its overoptimism, the company was too slow to cut costs to match its sales slump. 

   With toy sales industrywide flat the past couple of years, Coleco isn't the only toy company suffering these days. 
But its fall has been more marked than most. 

   In yesterday's composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Coleco shares closed at $2.50, down sharply from $20.50 in March 1986. 

   "This is a company that has sailed close to the wind, and they caught a gust," says Paul Valentine, a Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. analyst. 
"Their problem was not trimming their sails soon enough." 

   Coleco can make a comeback, industry analysts say, if the restructuring goes through and sales don't fall further. 
But that isn't assured. 
Sean McGowan, an analyst at Balis Zorn Gerard Inc. in New York, estimates that the company's 1988 sales could decline as much as 20% to about $400 million from $504.5 million last year and a peak of $776 million in 1985. 
Mr. McGowan says his projection is based on declining sales and the lack of a sure winner in sight. 

   Coleco itself is predicting a recovery. 
The company says its order backlog is larger today than at this time last year. 
And staff reductions -- including 50% at corporate headquarters in West Hartford, Conn. -- and lower interest payments, resulting from the restructuring, will lower break-even costs substantially, adds Morton Handel, Coleco's chief financial officer. 

   Besides, notes Mr. Handel, "We've been in a tight spot before." 

   Indeed, Coleco is the high-wire act of the toy industry. 
In the late 1970s, its Telstar video game shot downward, causing major problems. 
But the company pulled itself up a few years later when Telstar's successor, ColecoVision, proved a winner. 
Next, the company's survival was threatened in 1983 by its ill-fated plunge into the home-computer business with Adam, a product plagued with glitches. 

   "It was in the bottom of the ninth, with two outs and we were trailing," notes a former executive. 
Up stepped Cabbage Patch Kids, the industry's biggest hit ever. 

   Can Coleco come up with a winner to revive it a third time? 
The outlook isn't promising. 
Coleco had high hopes for Rambo, the boys' action figure based on the Sylvester Stallone movie character, but it flopped. 
So did Wrinkles, a plush animal made by a company that Coleco bought. 
And Starcom, a space-age action figure, appears to be burning out. 

   Coleco's one major recent success, Alf stuffed animals, had robust sales of $75 million -- making it the best-selling new toy of 1987. 
But Alf didn't make up for the declining Cabbage Patch sales, and industry analysts and buyers expect Alf to slow considerably this year. 

   One problem, says a former executive who asks not to be identified, is that Coleco has devoted too much research-and-development effort to expanding its Cabbage Patch line, to little avail. 
For example, Talking Cabbage Patch dolls introduced last year didn't live up to expectations, and prices are being marked down to $90 from $125. 

   "I thought they were a little too high on Cabbage," an insider says. 
Mr. Handel dismisses the charge saying, "Cabbage Patch was expected to produce sales ranging from $125 million to $150 million in 1987. 
It should do the same this year." 

   Coleco's new toys for 1988, introduced at last month's Toy Fair in New York, haven't stirred much excitement among retailers and analysts. 
Its only major new line is Princess Magic Touch, a six-inch plastic doll, and her entourage and accessories. 
"I don't think anyone in the company or the financial community is counting on new products," says Laurie Lively, an analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Co., New York. 

   At the same time, Coleco's diversification plan -- which industry analysts approve of as a way to smooth out the company's ups and down of the past -- has been disappointing so far. 

   In 1986, it bought Selchow &amp; Righter Co., the maker of Trivial Pursuit, for $60 million. 
But the board game had just peaked, with sales of $300 million in 1984, and its annual sales now are just $15 million. 
Selchow also makes Scrabble, among other games, but prospects are limited for increasing the unit's $90 million in annual sales. 

   Coleco also paid $62 million for the North American unit of Japanese toy maker Tomy Kogyo, expecting it to generate annual sales of $90 million to $100 million. 
But last year, it produced only about $60 million in sales. (Coleco has renegotiated the deal to link the price to sales, a move that could halve the original price.) 

   Coleco says it is happy with its acquisitions, adding that each of the divisions performed well last year. 

   With new toys and its diversification not offering any immediate hope of improved sales, Coleco's recovery depends largely on its cost-control plans. 
Recent layoffs, it says, have lowered corporate expenses sharply. 

   But it also needs to reduce its heavy debt, which cost it $60 million in interest payments last year. 
To do that, Coleco wants to exchange new stock and debentures for its high-interest-rate subordinated debentures now outstanding with a face value of $335 million. 
It plans to unveil its debt-restructuring proposal within the next few days. 

   "If it can get interest payments down by $30 million to $35 million, I think the company will be happy. 
Anything beyond that will be diluting the stock substantially," says Mr. McGowan, the Balis Zorn analyst. 
Bondholders may have little choice but to go along. 
"If (they) turn down the offer, that will just about set off the death knell for the company," he asserts. 
"Of course, the bondholders will have to ask: Is dissolving the company better than reorganization?" 

   Says one competitor: "In pitching its plan, Coleco will be holding candy in one hand and a gun in the other." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
