ID: 129	RANK: 82	SCORE: 8.226495
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870311-0111 </DOCNO>
<HL> Seven Reasons Why the Stock Market Is All Bull
---
By George Anders</HL>
<DD> 03/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   For most investors, this winter's 390-point leap in the Dow Jones Industrial Average is bewildering. 
Stocks have raced ahead while the underlying economy has hardly changed. 
That leaves a lot of people worried that stock prices may be getting too high, making some sort of slump inevitable. 

   But these pessimists haven't met Bernie the Bull. 
Bernie predicted the current market surge, all the insider-trading arrests, and Vanna White's latest hairdo. 
His following on Wall Street has never been greater. 
So Bernie offers the following seven reasons why U.S. stocks actually are cheaper than ever. 

   1.
A lot of companies haven't picked new names yet. 
So what, you say? 
Well, name changes are often bullish. 
As a recent Journal story observed, reborn companies such as Unisys (formerly Sperry and Burroughs) and Trinova (nee Libbey-Owens-Ford) have been outperforming the stock market lately. 

   This trend is in its infancy. 
IBM could surely "enhance shareholder value" by renaming itself Big Blue. 
General Motors could keep its initials but rename itself Growth Machine. 
Only the bitterest cynic would refuse to buy a company with such a nice name. 

   2.
The entire market is at its lowest price-earnings multiple since the dawn of time. 
To appreciate this, don't be confined by shabby old ideas about calculating P-E ratios. 
Look into the future a bit. 
In fact, start crunching numbers on your PC-AT and forecast earnings 20 years from now. 
Voila! 
Stocks aren't really trading at the current P-E of 19. 
They are trading at Less Than Three Times Estimated Earnings in the year 2007. 
That's much cheaper than the market's previous rock-bottom P-E of 7 in 1974. 

   This presents a rare buying opportunity. 
Pay no attention to skeptics who ask: "What if your forecast is wrong?" 
That is a childish, jealous remark by people who can't program a PC-AT. 

   3.
The Taiwanese have yet to start buying U.S. stocks. 
Look at what happened when the Japanese started ringing up trade surpluses of $50 billion and more. 
The joke was on them: There was nowhere to put the money except the U.S. stock and bond markets. 
Imagine how much spending power Taiwan will have in a few years' time. 

   4.
The Martians have yet to start buying. 
All right, it's a bit of a long shot. 
But 30 years ago, who would have thought Arab and Japanese investors would ever rescue our markets? 
No, if globalization of financial markets is upon us, we can surely anticipate the next wave. 
It's "interplanetary investing." 
And you can bet that the visitors from the Red Planet will start by buying big, triple-A-rated companies -- just like all foreigners do. 

   5.
Analysts may discover the Scrabble theory of valuing conglomerates. 
Since the 1960s, Wall Street has puzzled over what sort of P-E multiple to assign to these widely diversified companies. 
FMC, for example, trades at 19 times earnings, while CSX sells at 12 times earnings. 

   A quick look at a Scrabble set shows that FMC really should sell for 36 times earnings. 
That's 4 for the F, 3 for the M and 3 for the C. 
Since this is a bull market, the numbers all get multiplied. 
Or if you prefer, you can add up the numbers and get FMC's ideal price-to-book value. 
That comes out to 10 -- far above its current level. 

   Similarly, CSX should sell for 24 times earnings. 
That's 3, 1 and 8, multiplied together. 
If Wall Street isn't doing these calculations yet, don't worry. 
This method will catch on soon enough. 

   Of course, companies with mundane letters such as UAL would sell at much lower multiples. 
But UAL isn't letting this problem fester for long; it's changing its name to Allegis. 
Meanwhile other conglomerates remain drastically undervalued -- at least by this approach. 

   6.
Many companies have hidden assets that could raise their market values. 
So far, investors have focused mainly on companies with big real-estate holdings or with overseas broadcast rights to "I Love Lucy." 
But the best is yet to come. 
Does the stock market put a proper value on the prizes inside Cracker Jack boxes? 
What about the bits of meat at the bottom of Campbell Soup cans? 
Or the Stealth bomber? 

   No, everywhere you look, companies have assets that the market doesn't yet appreciate. 
In fact, why not buy the stock first and look for the assets later? 
That's what corporate raiders do. 

   7.
All stocks eventually will be taken over, turned into a leveraged buyout or put into a liquidating royalty trust. 
Each way, you -- the investor -- win. 
Not many people realize this, but Wall Street's best riposte to the insider-trading scandals is to put every company in play. 
That way, there's no inside information anymore. 
Everyone knows that deals are coming, no matter what the stock. 
And Wall Street's hard-working deal makers can keep getting $20 million fees for three weeks' work. 

   ---
   Mr. Anders covers institutional investing for the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
