ID: 129	RANK: 97	SCORE: 7.904316
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870611-0033 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sports, Fantasies and Stimulation:
Electronic Games Make Comeback
---
By Hank Gilman
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN>
<TEXT>
   "Pong" and "Pac-Man" and the rest of the video-game industry aren't dead. 

   They've just given way to "Leather Goddesses of Phobos." 

   Strong sales of that product and others reflect the changed nature and resurgent growth of the electronic-games business. 
All but written off after sales of video cartridges peaked in 1982, the industry is now dominated by computer games, a result of the growing popularity of powerful personal computers in homes. 

   Business has "never been better," says Ken Wasch, executive director of the Software Publishers Association. 
Sales of computer games increased 12% in 1986, he says, and are expected to rise an additional 20% this year to about $300 million. 
Even video-game cartridges are enjoying a comeback. 

   Although some software executives caution that the industry is still young and that computer games are hardly a mass-market item, there are indications that manufacturers may be able to better weather future slumps. 
Unlike some of their colleagues in the early 1980s, game makers are now targeting products to certain age groups and are paying more attention to advertising and packaging. 

   "It was seat of the pants" only a few years ago, says Victor D. Alhadeff, chairman of Egghead Discount Software, a retail chain based in San Mateo, Calif. 
"The industry has emerged from a group of people who were programmers and hobbyists to professional businessmen." 

   One thing manufacturers have learned is that computer games aren't just for adolescents. 
A recent study by Epyx Inc., a game maker in Redwood City, Calif., found that almost 40% of surveyed executives play computer games on their computers at work. 
Some game makers even include fake spreadsheets in their programs so users can fool their boss. 

   Game makers had been exclusively "going after a very volatile youth market that was very faddish," says Russell Sipe, editor of Computer Gaming World, a trade magazine. 
"Now they're going after more adult markets that are less subject to fads." 

   About 40% of the customers of Infocom Inc., a game maker in Cambridge, Mass., are between 30 and 45 years old, says Michael Dornbrook, the company's marketing director. 
Infocom has sold more than 80,000 copies of "Leather Goddesses of Phobos," a fantasy game in which Martian sirens "turn Earth into their private pleasure palace," Mr. Dornbrook explains. 
Infocom's customers, presumably adults, paid $40 for the "R-rated" game, he adds, which begins in an Upper Sandusky, Ohio, bar and "comes in three lewdness levels." 

   Mr. Alhadeff of the 60-store Egghead chain says strong sales of International Business Machines Corp.'s PCs and less-expensive PC "clones" are partly responsible for the renewed success of electronic games. 
"As business computers proliferate there's a carry-over into the home," he explains. 
"Two to three years ago, manufacturers weren't even making games for the IBM." 

   Meanwhile, the increased availability of powerful machines like IBM's PCs, Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh and Commodore International Ltd.'s Amiga -- all with large memories -- have allowed software companies to produce more complex games. 
"Real life in the box; in the long run, that's the goal of all this," says David Grady, a software producer with Electronic Arts in San Mateo, Calif. 

   Until recently manufacturers produced games that required only 64 kilobytes of memory. (That equals about 32 double-spaced pages of information.) 
Now, many personal computers have at least 256K of memory. 
"We've got more machine to work with," says Mr. Grady. 
For instance, the early version of Electronic Arts' "Archon" chess game required 32K of memory. 
Now, the opening sound effect alone -- a thunderclap -- requires 32K of memory. 

   The more powerful machines also allow software companies to produce more realistic games, the most popular of which are sports games, fantasy games and so-called "simulation" games, which recreate jetfighter battles or helicopter raids. 
"It's getting as hard to fly these helicopter simulations as it is to fly (real) helicopters," says Gary Carlston, chairman of Broderbund Inc., a software maker in San Rafael, Calif. 

   A ball in Electronic Art's "Earl Weaver Baseball," for example, can be hit 2,000 different ways (line drives, high hoppers, etc.), and that doesn't include the possibilities that are also factored in for wind conditions and the ballpark's playing field. 
The game, which took two years to develop and uses statistics of real major league players, even considers weak-throwing right fielders or arm-weary pitchers. 

   The improved graphic capabilities of many computers also make for more realistic games, says Bruce Davis, president of Activision Inc. in Santa Clara, Calif. 
While older computerized football games often illustrated players by using X's and O's, state-of-the-art football games "have on-the-field perspective," Mr. Davis explains. 
"You're in the position of the ball carrier, and you look at the tackler coming at you as you run up the field." 

   In addition to sports games, war-simulation games are also popular. 
For $35, a desk-bound computer user can even attack Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi with MicroProse Software Inc.'s "F-15 Strike Eagle" game, which simulates seven combat missions. 
"You take off a carrier in the Gulf of Sidra and go after Col. Gadhafi's air force and command and control center," explains J.W. "Bill" Stealey, president of Hunt Valley, Md.-based MicroProse. 
"And this time you don't miss the tent." 

   To help sell these products, computer game makers are now targeting their software for certain age groups, a strategy many manufacturers didn't employ in the past. 
Teen-agers, for instance, are interested in games that recreate "things they can't do in real life" like drive or fly a plane, says Trip Hawkins, president of Electronic Arts. 

   Along with growing sales of computer games, the industry is seeing a resurgence of the old video-cartridge market. 
Manufacturers say there is a new generation of children who aren't bored with "Donkey Kong." 
"We're all jaded and saying 'Here we go again,'" says Mr. Carlston of Broderbund. 
"But for them it's all fresh and new." 

   Sales of video-game cartridges, which are played on video-game machines that normally are hooked up to a television monitor, peaked in 1982 with 65 million units but plunged to seven million units three years later. 
Redmond, Wash.-based Nintendo of America Inc., which is leading the revival with a new home video-game machine, projects that it alone will sell nine million video-game cartridges this year. 
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. ran a full page of video cartridges in it Christmas catalog and the games are selling briskly, a spokesman says. 

   Despite the upturn in electronic video and computer games, some industry executives remain cautious. 
Growth rates are still modest by the standards set several years ago, and Activision, one of the nation's biggest game makers, has been plagued by losses. 

   To make computer games a mass-market item, a big leap in technology may be necessary, says Mr. Hawkins of Electronic Arts. 
Compact disks, or CDs, are one possible answer. 
A CD, which can hold 1,000 times the information of a computer disk, has the audio-visual capabilities that, he says, will someday attract a wider range of buyers. 

   ---

               THE GAMES PEOPLE ARE PLAYING
       The top 12 sellers at Egghead Discount stores
                 from March 29 to June 8*
    Game               Manufacturer      Machines
 Flight Simulator V    Microsoft         IBM and compatibles
 Chess Master 2000     Software          IBM and
                       Toolworks         compatibles
 King's Quest III      Sierra On-Line    IBM and compatibles
 Star Flight           Electronic Arts   IBM and compatibles
 Bard's Tale II        Electronic Arts   Apple II
 Dark Castle           Silicon Beach     Apple Macintosh
 Scrabble              Electronic Arts   IBM and compatibles
 Sky Fox               Electronic Arts   Apple II
 Flight Simulator      Microsoft         Apple Macintosh
 Space Quest: Sarie    Sierra On-Line    IBM and compatibles
 Infiltrator           Mindscape         IBM and compatibles
 Sub Battle            Epyx              IBM and compatibles
   *The stores do not stock software for Commodore
International Ltd. computers.
   (Revised WSJ June 12, 1987)

</TEXT>
</DOC>
