ID: 110	RANK: 18	SCORE: 9.430233
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880901-0085 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Country Music Foundation: Mecca With a Mission </HL>
<AUTHOR> James Ring Adams </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Nashville, Tenn.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Looking like a huge converted barn, the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum dominates the hill at the start of Nashville's Music Row. 
To tourists, it's the shrine housing Elvis Presley's "solid gold Cadillac." 
But to the music world, this barn and its parent Country Music Foundation are a mecca in the astonishing resurgence of this basic American art form. 

   The CMF, with its splendid collection of more than 100,000 records and extensive research library, is working hard to give country music the intellectual and historical foundation it sorely needs and deserves. 
"We're trying to show the breadth and depth of country music," says CMF director William Ivey. 
This mission takes a split personality. 
Its museum and gift shop cater to 400,000 country fans each year, who sandwich their visits between tourist stops like Twitty City, Cars of the Stars and the Opryland theme park. 
But the foundation also reaches a growing "downstairs audience," of scholars, music writers and performers who frequent its glass-enclosed underground reading room. 

   In both respects, the fully accredited CMF is the leading American museum devoted to popular music. 
Planners for the much publicized Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland have made several visits to study its operations. 

   The CMF's more serious side is largely the work of Bill Ivey, who is prematurely white-haired at the age of 43. 
Mr. Ivey joined the foundation 17 years ago, just four years after the museum opened. 
An A.B.D. (All But Dissertation) from Indiana University's folklore center, he was quickly named CMF director and ever since has been proselytizing not only the public, but recording company executives and country music stars. 

   One of his leading acolytes is the popular singer Emmylou Harris, who currently holds the honorific title of CMF president. 
Her involvement with the CMF dates to her first big hit, a 1975 cover of the Louvin Brothers' classic "If I Could Only Win Your Love." 
After that recording, she recalls, Mr. Ivey approached her with a compilation of hard-to-get material by the Louvins, one of the leading country duets of the late 1950s. 
She gratefully recorded several more of their hits, she performed live with the surviving brother, Charlie Louvin, and she joined the CMF board. 

   Other stars have used the library and record collection one floor below the museum exhibits, the Hall of Fame gallery and the gift shop. 
Nanci Griffith, the "folkabilly" singer-songwriter from Texas, has riden her bicycle over to look up songs half-remembered from her childhood. 
The eccentric and extremely gifted k.d. lang has consulted the CMF's holdings on her hero (and according to some rumors her putative past life), the great Patsy Cline. 
Merle Haggard has been visiting since the mid-'70s, and actor Robert Duvall used CMF tapes to prepare for his role in the movie "Tender Mercies." 
The former teenage heartthrob Brenda Lee has served on the CMF board of trustees, along with Ms. Harris and leading industry executives. 

   The CMF also cultivates the record companies. 
A group of record producers and Nashville division heads from labels such as Warner Bros. and MCA have met regularly at the museum for lunch and talks with industry veterans such as Chet Atkins. 
"We're trying to create a sense of continuity," says Mr. Ivey. 
The exposure to the past has worked both ways. 
Companies have given the CMF access to their own archives and occasionally made valuable donations. 
A few years ago, for instance, Opryland bought a downtown Nashville print shop that specialized in concert posters and gave the CMF a 10-year lease on its contents. 
The shop turned out to be a treasure trove of wood-block folk art and concert documentation going back to the turn of the century. 

   But the greatest triumph of this collaboration, and possibly of the CMF's career, was the release last year of a two-record set called "The Bristol Sessions." 
The sixth issue from the foundation's own 2 1/2-year-old label, this set is nothing less than a cross-section of American traditional music at the dawn of commercial country music. 
In late July and August of 1927, Ralph Peer, an executive of Victor Talking Machine Co., set up a field studio in Bristol, Tenn., the urban center for the middle Appalachians. 
In just three days of this talent search, Peer discovered some of the greatest names in country music history, including Jimmy Rodgers (the "blue yodeler") and the Carter Family. 
The CMF culled selections from Peer's 76 recordings, using acetates from the archives of RCA -- Victor, the corporate successor of Peer's employers. 
RCA's help was "absolutely essential," says CMF assistant director Kyle Young. 

   Critics have praised "The Bristol Sessions" for its technical excellence. (The set received two Grammy nominations last year, in the categories of "Best Historical Album" and "Best Album Notes.") 
But the records also are surprisingly enjoyable, and they explode a few preconceptions. 
Even though Peer kept asking the performers for "old-time" songs, a broad range of influences kept creeping in. 
One of the "hillbilly" musicians showed up with a ukulele. 
Protest singers mingled with the gospel groups and mountain fiddlers. 
Songs by one of the new talents, Blind Alfred Reed, were still being covered by folk singers in the '70s. 

   The most surprising entry of all was the song "Single Girl, Married Girl" that the Carter women, Sara and cousin Maybelle, chose to cap their session. 
Backed by Maybelle's marvelous guitar, it features lyrics like "Single girl, single girl, she goes to the store and buys; married girl, married girl, she rocks the cradle and cries," beginning a streak of feminist protest in country music that is about a mile wide. 

   The CMF doesn't limit itself to "oldtime" music. 
It has issued previously unreleased material from Hank Williams Sr. and the Louvin Brothers and is about to come out with a record of Buck Owens's famous 1966 Carnegie Hall concert. 
It conducts oral history interviews with industry veterans, and three times a year it prints the Journal of Country Music, a handsome blend of photography, current profiles and scholarship. 
Ms. Harris says the CMF's scope is "American music, really, not just country. 
It takes in gospel, hillbilly, cajun -- all kinds of ethnic music, some of it popular, some of it waiting to be discovered." 

   Much of this activity isn't immediately evident to the visitors who pay a $6.50 entrance fee to wander among cases of costumes worn by stars from Hank Williams to Reba McEntire, to see Burt Reynolds's Trans-Am from "Smokey and the Bandit" and to pluck the hands-on instrument displays. 
The museum sees itself as "market-driven," supporting its scholarship by responding to popular tastes in its exhibits. 
This strategy puts the museum in the black on a $3.3 million budget. (Even "The Bristol Sessions" set turned a profit.) 
It also produces occasional major exhibits blending solid history and mass appeal, such as the newly opened survey of Johnny Cash, who married Maybelle Carter's daughter, June Carter Cash. 

   The CMF staff not only tolerates the hokier side of country music, it sometimes revels in it. 
A former director of its Oral History Project, Douglas Green, left to join the comedy and western music group Riders in the Sky under the name Ranger Doug, "the idol of American youth." 
Another alumnus, Robert K. Oermann, is popular music reporter for the Nashville Tennessean. 
The CMF staff fondly remembers some of the donations Mr. Ivey has tactfully turned down, notably Porter Waggoner's "Fish-tar," a guitar-shaped board on which the singer and avid fisherman had mounted a dozen or so of his prize catches. 

   But the final word came from the museum's summer interns one day when the senior staff was away at a conference. 
After raiding a local supermarket and applying gilt paint, the interns set up a display near the Presley Cadillac of, what else, Elvis's "solid gold shopping cart." 

   ---
   Mr. Adams is a former Journal editorialist. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
