ID: 110	RANK: 58	SCORE: 7.168674
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870923-0106 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Piazzolla's Tangos: No Song, No Dance
---
By Heidi Waleson</HL>
<DD> 09/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   If you think the tango means bodies twined together to a simple, smoky melody with a relentless beat, think again. 
Astor Piazzolla has other ideas. 
"We don't dance, and we don't sing," the Argentine musician informed the audience, which had been calling out requests, at a recent concert in Central Park. 
"This is a music group. 
I killed everybody who sang. 
I strangled them personally." 

   Mr. Piazzolla is a classically trained composer who has spent the last 30 years or so trying to liberate Argentina's most famous musical form from its past as dance music. 
This 66-year-old master of the bandoneon, an Argentine form of the accordion, studied Bach and Mozart first, but then spent years arranging tangos for an Argentine band. 
The two worlds came together when Mr. Piazzolla took his classical compositions to Nadia Boulanger in Paris. 
"I studied with her for a year and a half," he recalls, "and she convinced me that I should do what I feel, not what you're supposed to do . . . 
She convinced me that I should be Astor Piazzolla, the one she heard playing tangos on the piano." 

   Returning to Argentina, Mr. Piazzolla started writing his own, very cosmopolitan tangos. 
The outside influences he brought to this old bordello music -- "baroque, classical, neoclassical, 12-tone system, aleatory, sometimes jazz" -- repelled tango purists and earned him the nickname "assassin of the tango." 
But he is by no means a pariah in his own country. 
He played at the most recent presidential inauguration in Buenos Aires, where his image has been helped by success outside Argentina. 

   A regular visitor to festivals and theaters in Europe, Mr. Piazzolla is now spending a few weeks in the U.S. with his New Tango Quintet (violin, piano, guitar, bass). 
The group wound up its 10-stop tour, which included the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival, with the Summerstage concert in Central Park. 

   Undaunted by ominous skies, a crowd of 4,000 packed the bleachers, chairs and concrete around the bandshell. 
When the rain started, umbrellas went up, but only a few spectators departed, and their places were quickly occupied by standees. 

   There was something mesmerizing about these five men in somber black trousers and shirts. 
Mr. Piazzolla stands front and center, one foot propped on a large box so that he can support his instrument on his knee. (He learned to play it standing, he says, because sitting down he looked like "an old woman knitting.") 
The bandoneon, a large black-and-silver cube with buttons on both sides and no keys, can be pulled out to a fantastic snakelike length, its graceful dipping and curving the physical illustration of a long phrase. 

   At this concert, the amplification muddied and overemphasized the piano, and the guitar and bass mostly seemed to be providing rhythmic underpinning. 
The virtuoso playing came from Mr. Piazzolla and Fernando Suarez Paz, the violinist, who played without music and could deliver slides, shrieks and high, haunting harmonics in addition to the more usual gestures. 
The bandoneon has a rich, organlike, mournful sound, but it can be aggressive and lyrical in turn. 

   Sometimes one is hard pressed to hear the tango roots of these very different, often lavishly ornamented pieces, which range from three to nearly 10 minutes in length. 
Mr. Piazzolla will take a melodic idea and pass it from instrument to instrument, or he will play a finger-busting embellishment. 
Is it jazz? 
Is it Bach? 
One piece will be hard driving, another singing, with a violin solo that might have come from Brahms. 
There are subtle Bartokian conflicts, wide, unashamedly pop-sounding melodies, and curious acoustic effects: Mr. Piazzolla drumming on his instrument or Fernando Suarez Paz playing scratchy notes below the bridge of his violin. 
Overall, the conceptions seem somewhat limited, based on repetition and ornament, closer to jazz than to the larger classical forms. 
Still, the pieces are tightly organized, never self-indulgent, and their sound is compelling. 
Mr. Piazzolla, unsmiling at the center, has it all under control. 

   Mr. Piazzolla puts his music somewhere between popular and classical music. 
"I hear it more like chamber music, but not so complicated, not so contemporary," he says, though he has written a piece for the Kronos Quartet. 
He prefers to play in a chamber-music setting, for "thinking people, not people who just like music as something to give them a good digestion." 

   Mr. Piazzolla is a pretty tough character, filled with disdain for people who come to his concerts expecting to rock out, and he also despises reactionary Argentines who insist that tango never change. 
This leads him, perhaps, to exaggerate his antipathy to singing and dancing. 
He lets European choreographers use his music, and in New York in November the Westbeth Theater will stage his music-theater piece, "Borges and Myself," which, he says, will have some of the flavor of the happier 19th-century tango that the Argentine novelist J.L. Borges loved. 

   Mr. Piazzolla has also been commissioned to write an opera for the Opera Company of Philadelphia based on the life of Carlos Gardel, the famous tango singer who died in 1935. 
Mr. Piazzolla once played in Gardel's band, and you'd have to suppose that this work will reflect the experience musically. 
But even when he does his best to strangle the old tango performer in him, his instrumental distillations of the form can grab an audience. 
The fans in New York -- whether they were expecting what they got or not -- went decidedly wild. 

   ---
   Ms. Waleson is a free-lance New York music writer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
