ID: 110	RANK: 70	SCORE: 7.053581
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871221-0188 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Pop: Putting an End to Silent Nights
---
By Pam Lambert</HL>
<DD> 12/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Even Santa, I'm afraid, can't produce a new Peter Gabriel album in time for Christmas. 
But Robbie Robertson's done the next best thing. 
On his own recent release he's come up with "Fallen Angel," an elegy to his former Band-mate Richard Manuel that features Gabriel at his finest. 
Of course Robertson's record is itself a pretty terrific present. 
The self-titled Geffen album is the first the Band's guitarist and chief songwriter has made since that group's last waltz over a decade ago. 

   The new release acknowledges Robertson's past, particularly in its exploration of what he's called "American mythology." 
But it's no less inspired by pop's present. 
Some of this seems due to his collaborators -- including Gabriel, U2 and, most importantly, producer Daniel Lanois (whose hand has helped shape these musicians' recent sounds). 
The album really ignites on "Sweet Fire of Love," as Robertson exchanges guitar crossfire with U2's Edge and impassioned vocals with Bono. 
In fact, the song could pass for a prime U2 cut. 

   Which is the only problem with "Robbie Robertson." 
The artist clearly has his own vision, but hasn't yet been able to create a new musical vocabulary to express it. 
Let's hope that having shown his mastery of rock's current idioms, he'll want to help chart its future. 

   ---
   Part of the future is already here -- and her name is Sinead O'Connor. 
On "The Lion and the Cobra" (Chrysalis), the 20-year-old Dublin native makes one of the most commanding debuts of the year. 

   If you think Sinead's skinhead look is arresting (that's the idea), wait until you hear her sing. 
Her magnificently expressive voice can shift from ethereal to operatic to rock-raw -- and it's only a fraction of her gift. 
She wrote eight of the nine songs here, as well as arranged and produced. 
Not only are the compositions strikingly diversified, but internally they snake gracefully from mode to mode. 
For instance, the memorable "Never Get Old" opens with a Gaelic recitation of the 91st Psalm, then segues into a gentle Celtic-sounding chant -- before bursting wide open with thundering piano chords and climaxing in ecstatic scat singing. 

   With this much talent, Sinead doesn't need a gimmick to get noticed. 

   ---
   On "The Lonesome Jubilee" (Mercury), heartland rocker John Cougar Mellencamp lifts his eyes from the cornfields and looks out toward the horizon. 
As signaled by the quote from Ecclesiastes on the album jacket, Mellencamp's concerned about how the lives we lead, the choices we make, the dreams we chase, fit into the big picture. 
The timelessness of these issues is echoed in the music, as Mellencamp adds folk instrumentation to his crackerjack band. 

   Particularly noteworthy are the songs in which Mellencamp poses a question more performers probably should as they rock into middle age: How do you reconcile the concerns of maturity with an unslaked thirst for living to the limit? 
I'd say making records like this is one answer. 

   Another comes from Bruce Springsteen, on "Tunnel of Love" (Columbia). 
The spare, introspective album doesn't directly address the subject of growing older -- but it is all about growing up. 
In these deftly limned miniatures -- most of which cry out for headphones -- Springsteen takes a hard look at lovers as they struggle with all the doubts and fears and demons they must master if they're to ride together down the highway toward eternity. 

   Sting's also got a lot on his mind. 
Maybe too much. 
On ". . . 
Nothing Like the Sun" (A&amp;M), he wrestles with love, death, political torture, the meaning of life -- not to mention an equally vast array of musical styles. 
The results on this CD-length work (whose less than 60 minutes don't nearly fill the two-LP set) are commendable more often for their ambition than their achievement. 

   ---
   Perennial college and critical favorite R.E.M. is striking a responsive chord across the country with "Document" (I.R.S.), the Athens, Ga., quartet's fifth and finest album. 
Though the commercial breakthrough probably owes a lot to the hit single, the release offers a diversified set of well-focused guitar-based rock that documents a band to be reckoned with. 

   You can still be the first on your block to discover R.E.M.'s neighbors, the grossly misnamed Squalls, who're making their album debut with the mildly mistitled "Rebel Shoes" (Dog Gone Records, 404-549-8279). 
Instead of the thrash/punk or Southern boogie you might expect, the group plays concise, catchy pop, often with a pleasantly retro feel. 

   ---
   According to the music-industry buzz, Terence Trent D'Arby is the Next Big Thing. 
After all, the young American expatriate's got good looks, a great soulful voice and platinum sales in Britain. 
Judging from his Columbia debut, much of the enthusiasm's understandable. 
His songs, by turns funky and sweet, are long on style if short on melody. 
Meanwhile, Minneapolis soul man Alexander O'Neal definitely has arrived. 
On his second album, "Hearsay" (Tabu/CBS), he wraps his big voice around a seductive package of pop-funk and ballads. 

   ---
   Sure guitarist Joe Satriani, who's taught a lick or two to some of metal's heaviest, can play loud and fast -- as he does on the blistering title track of his new album, "Surfing With the Alien" (Relativity). 
But, as this imaginative instrumental set demonstrates, he can dazzle in a dozen styles -- yes, even soft and slow. 

   ---
   Noted in brief: It's no surprise Stevie Wonder's latest release, "Characters" (Motown), feels as comfy as your favorite pair of jeans. 
Half the tracks are retooled versions of older, previously unreleased material -- and the rest might as well be. 

   "A Very Special Christmas" (A&amp;M) finds 15 top pop acts making naughty and nice to benefit the Special Olympics. 
For those content with a single star, "Chronicles" (Island/Warner Bros.) offers a thoughtfully assembled sampler of Steve Winwood's solo career. 
The music, reflective yet rhythmic, provides the perfect soundtrack for end-of-the-year musing. 

   But maybe you'd rather work off that eggnog. 
Madonna's guaranteed to get you into the groove with "You Can Dance" (Sire), extended remixes of some of her hottest dance hits. 
If you'd prefer to watch somebody else work out, Prince's concert movie "Sign o' the Times" is the ticket. 
On this funkadelic foray His Badness is backed by a dynamic new band -- including the sizzling Sheila E. on drums -- and gets to cavort with a sex kitten called Cat. 

   George Harrison's "Cloud Nine" (Dark Horse) offers further evidence that the Beatles were greater than the sum of their parts. 

   With the propulsive "Chuck Berry: Hail! 
Hail! 
Rock 'n' Roll" soundtrack (MCA), producer Keith Richards goes a way toward repaying the legendary rocker for all the riffs he and the Stones have appropriated over the years. 

   Long before Paul Simon could say "mbaqanga," South African Johnny Clegg and his integrated band, Juluka, were playing an infectious blend of this Zulu musical genre and Western sounds. 
Now Clegg's back with a new sextet, Savuka, and an ebullient album of Afro-bop, "Third World Child" (Capitol). 

   Pink Floyd, "A Momentary Lapse of Reason" (Columbia) -- More like 50 minutes, by my count. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
