ID: 240	RANK: 100	SCORE: 12.399061
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880712-0052 </DOCNO>
<HL> It Just Isn't Cricket As British Warm Up Their Baseball Team --- Performing on a Rugby Field, Humberside's Bears Are, Well, a Lot of Bad News </HL>
<AUTHOR> John J. Fialka (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> EUROP </CO>
<DATELINE> RICHMOND, England  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Here's the windup . . . the pitch. 
No, the pitcher fakes it, and fires the ball to second base, which is empty. 
It's a balk. 
No, the umpire says, it isn't a balk. 
There is a long argument. 
Runners on first and third, who stray away from their bases, are tagged out. 
And that retires the side. 

   It hasn't been the best of days for the Humberside County Bears. 
To start, the team bus took a wrong turn on the way to the game, and arrived two hours late. 
The delay didn't outrage a lot of fans because, uh, there weren't a lot of fans to outrage. 
Half the team's 40-odd supporters took off for more entertaining diversions in nearby London before the first pitch was thrown. 

   The Bears eventually rally, and go on to win the game, 7-3. 
But that doesn't seem to comfort Don Smallwood, owner of the Bears. 
At the moment, he is nursing a post-game pint of bitter and reflecting on the future of baseball in Britain. 
"Am I backing a winner here," he asks, "or am I backing a loser?" 

   That's a fair question, considering the situation. 
Baseball will be played for the first time as a competitive event at the Olympics in 1992 -- and the British are determined to compete. 
The job of readying a first-rate team has fallen to Mr. Smallwood, who also is the president of the British Baseball Federation. 
He has four years. 
It may not be enough. 

   Mr. Smallwood is learning firsthand the problems of introducing America's beloved summer game to a nation that barely knows summer. 
First, there is the matter of educating the players, who were raised on cricket. 
In cricket, pitchers hurl the ball with a funny, straight-arm motion. 
Running bases is felt to be unimportant. 
As for stealing them, well, that isn't cricket. 

   Finding a place to play can be tough for teams, too. 
For this game, the Bears squared off against their opponents, London's Southern Tigers, on a rugby field. 
It was spacious enough, but the striped yard lines running through the infield tended to add to the confusion. 

   Back home, the Bears used to make do with the grassy circle in the center of a bicycle racetrack some 40 miles outside the town of Hull. 
Now, they play in a stadium closer to home. 

   The British used to like baseball, which is believed to have evolved from the game of rounders, popular in medieval England. 
Baseball flourished in certain parts of England and Wales before World War II. 
During the war, though, American GIs played baseball all over Britain. 
Their enthusiasm drove a lot of locals back to cricket. 

   "For a while," Mr. Smallwood explains, "anything that came from America was viewed as being too gaudy, just too razzmatazz." 

   A few years ago, British television began running U.S. major league baseball games at 4 a.m. 
The games revived interest in the sport, especially among kids. 
Now, there are 144 amateur teams here. 
Only eight years ago, there were 20. 

   Last year, a league of six elite teams was set up to show the kids what homegrown baseball should look like. 
Among the teams is the Humberside County Bears. 

   The Bears are working-class youths who earn their livings painting houses, collecting garbage and working in construction. 
For that reason, fielding a team for away games on Saturdays is tough. 
Many of the youths have to work on Saturday mornings. 

   Last year, when the Bears showed up here to play another London-based team, they were blown off the field. 
Their opponents had come equipped with a secret weapon: Americans who were living in London. 
The final score was an embarrassing 21-0. 

   This year, the Bears are back, looking for revenge and similarly armed to the hilt. 
The infield, with one exception, has been recruited from a team at the U.S. Air Force Base in Lakenheath, south of Hull. 

   Trevor South, the Bears' coach, knows the importance of sacrifice plays. 
He benched his own brother to make room for another American on the field. 

   That is how Dale Shields, who normally fixes avionics systems on U.S. F-111 bombers at Lakenheath, found himself in the middle of the balk argument during the game. 
"This is unreal!" he screams at the umpire as he is tagged out. 

   "Let the Brits get on with their game, Mr. America," Tigers' owner Peter Hunt shouts back. 
"Go play in the States if you don't like it." 

   "I wish I could," Mr. Shields mutters as he walks back to the bench. (Rugby fields don't have dugouts.) 

   The Tigers don't like to stress the source of their baseball prowess. 
The team's press releases say the team has "English born and bred players." 
Under questioning in the stadium pub, Mr. Hunt admits to having recruited a Dutchman, a Pakistani and an American third baseman. 

   Further research reveals Mike Quinn, a veteran of minor league ball in Toledo, Ohio, lurking in left field. 
"You need Americans to set the standard," argues Julian Dodwell, the Tigers' captain. 

   But British baseball teams are going to have to wean themselves off foreign talent. 
Next year, the league hopes to persuade teams to limit themselves to four foreign players each. 
For the Olympic qualifying games, which start later this year, teams are barred from having more than two foreign players. 

   In any case, British baseball fans are betting that baseball fever will spread fast enough to lure more fans. 
There is reason for hope. 
Cable television has begun showing U.S. baseball games during prime evening hours. 

   In contrast, televised cricket games are boring, British baseball fans say. 
"Cricket is like watching paint dry," Mr. South, the Bears' coach, says. 
Mr. Hunt agrees. 
"I don't believe the psychology of cricket is right for this day and age." 
He notes that some cricket games last five days. 
Even after all that, games can end in a draw. 

   Baseball is beginning to be a lure for youths who dream of making a fortune in America. 
A top cricket bowler, the equivalent of a baseball pitcher, earns #10,000, or $17,000, a year here. 
In the U.S., a good major league pitcher can earn half a million dollars a season. 

   With that in mind, Ian Pont, one of professional cricket's fastest bowlers, decided to try out for the Philadelphia Phillies last year. 
The Phillies told Mr. Pont, 25, that he had the right stuff, but it wasn't coming across the plate fast enough. 
Team officials suggested three or four years in the minors. 

   "I was looking at being a 30-year-old rookie," explains Mr. Pont. 
He came back to cricket. 
On Sundays, however, he still can be found working on his curve ball, pitching for London's Enfield Spartans. 

   To a British ear, the bench patter during games still may not sound very homegrown: "Hey, good eye, good eye!" 
"Wayta go, babe! 
Wayta hit it!" 
But occasionally, there is evidence that baseball is coming back to its English roots. 

   "You're seeing it all right, George," says a voice in a thick Yorkshire accent. 
"Now, stand up to it, lad!" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
