ID: 302	RANK: 41	SCORE: 10.532344
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870529-0089 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Behind the Glamour Girl's Mask
---
By James Reginato</HL>
<DD> 05/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   When Leland Hayward and his wife, now Lady Nancy Keith, divorced, their settlement included a division of turf at El Morocco. 
He had to stick to one side of the fabled nightclub's main room, she to the other. 
That was the kind of world in which lived Brenda Frazier, when, for a time, she was the most famous girl alive. 
In the six months preceding her debut in December of 1938, the press somehow singled her out from among the legions of her debut-bound peers and anointed her "Glamour Girl No. 1"; Super-Deb. 

   Five-thousand articles appeared about Brenda in half a year, everywhere from the Saginaw News to Life Magazine, whose cover she adorned. 
Even the Daily Worker wrote about her (under the headline "$8 Million Glamour Girl Has Serious Side -- Once Read a Book"). 
Her every move was documented; a perfume, Sarong, was created in her honor; she endorsed Studebakers (though she didn't drive); her "look" -- translucent white skin, deep red lips, and dark hair with prominent widow's peak -- became the rage. 

   While the ostensible subject of "Debutante: The Story of Brenda Frazier" (Knopf, 331 pages, $19.95) is the quick rise and long, long fall of the girl herself, its author, journalist Gioia Diliberto, is as much concerned with the phenomenon of Brenda's incredible, inexplicable fame: the press that created it, the public that consumed it. 

   Enterprising reporters managed to build entire articles around the girl's new hairdo or her tired feet ("I love it. 
But golly, my feet hurt! -- a tea dance this afternoon, out again tonight, then dancing later," she told America). 
Brenda would never have risen into the view of the nation's intrepid reporters, however, without two powerful engines: her social-climbing mother and grandmother, who mercilessly programmed her social calendar. 
When Brenda was feeling ill, which was often, her mother would march into her bedroom and say "You're going out; you're going to El Morocco and the Stork Club. 
Get up. 
You're just pretending to be sick." 

   Brenda wasn't truly beautiful, but, thanks to her elders' efforts, she became dazzling: by age 13 (when she had her own French lady's maid and could be spotted waltzing until dawn at the St. Regis in floor-length pink chiffon, heavy makeup and expensive jewels), Brenda was spending more time on manicures, pedicures, coiffures and fittings, than at school. 
But as her mother said: "You do not become a grande dame in society by playing the piano or painting seriously." 

   Mother Frazier pulled all the stops to orchestrate a debut for Brenda grand and gaudy enough to be a deification. 
And, by all accounts, she succeeded. 
The party, at New York's Ritz-Carlton Hotel, drew 1,400 top-drawer swells and generated as much press as a coronation. 
President Roosevelt's niece came out at the White House the same evening, but the next day the San Francisco Chronicle's banner headline read: "BRENDA IS FINALLY OUT, NOW WE CAN ALL RELAX." 

   Ms. Diliberto attempts to explain this baffling celebrity -- which puzzled even the reporters who created it -- and traces it to the Depression era's consuming hunger for escapism. 
This explanation seems incomplete, however, when one reads how astoundingly dull the girl really was: "Brenda's typical day that year began at noon. 
Lying in bed, drinking the coffee brought to her by Slater, she would phone her friends. 
Later, she'd lunch at an expensive restaurant, usually having three shrimp and a glass of brandy champagne." 

   As meticulously as Ms. Diliberto charts Brenda's social ascent, so does she chronicle her descent, which began promptly after her first marriage, in 1941. 
After Pearl Harbor, debutantes and the rest of the idle rich slid out of fashion. 
Obsolete, then, at 21, Brenda filled her many declining years by drifting through marriages and affairs, and into alcoholism, anorexia, bulimia, suicide attempts (30 of them; wrist-slitting was her favored method -- her arms looked like railroad tracks), and drug addiction. 
To her dying day, however, she retained a clipping service, to make sure she wouldn't miss any stories about herself. 

   The end was truly ghoulish. 
As her life deteriorated, she remained ever more devoted to the care and application of her "Glamour Girl Mask," which took hours to prepare and involved foundation, "several powderpuff-fuls of rice powder mixed with cornstarch which gave her the patina of a Kabuki dancer," false eyelashes, liver-red lipstick, and a black velvet stick-on beauty mark. 
"As Brenda's life grew darker, the mask grew whiter," observes Ms. Diliberto. 

   She records the gory details unflinchingly: "On top of her bed were clouds of lacy pillows and flowered cotton sheets, which Brenda always covered with plastic before eating dinner or slitting her wrists." 

   Readers at this point may wonder if "Debutante" isn't really a long-lost Edgar Allan Poe story. 
But did Poe ever write anything this scary? 

   ---
   Mr. Reginato is a free-lance writer living in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
