ID: 302	RANK: 45	SCORE: 10.350251
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870128-0131 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
'Contemptible' Chaucer to 'Vulgar' Voltaire
---
By Ned Crabb</HL>
<DD> 01/28/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The following is one of the rottenest reviews I've ever read about a published work: "It is a vulgar and barbarous drama, which would not be tolerated by the vilest populace of France, or Italy. . . . 
one would imagine this piece to be the work of a drunken savage." 

   That was Voltaire writing in 1768 about "Hamlet." 
It is one of 175 excerpts of scathing notices in "Rotten Reviews: A Literary Companion" (Pushcart Press, 93 pages, $12.50), edited by Bill Henderson and with an amusing, perceptive introduction by Anthony Brandt. 
The book demonstrates that literally no one literary eludes revilement from some source. 

   Lord Byron didn't like Shakespeare either: "{His} name, you may depend on it, stands absurdly too high and will go down." 
And he thought Chaucer "obscene and contemptible: he owes his celebrity merely to his antiquity." 
Byron, however, got his from John Quincy Adams: "His versification is so destitute of sustained harmony . . . 
I have always believed his verses would soon rank with forgotten things." 

   H.L. Mencken, the critic of everyone and everything, called Henry James ". . . an idiot, and a Boston idiot, to boot, than which there is nothing lower in the world." 
Ralph Waldo Emerson couldn't abide Jane Austen; her novels, he said, are "imprisoned in the wretched conventions of English society, without genius, wit or knowledge of the world. . . . 
The one problem in the mind of the writer is marriageableness. 
Suicide is more respectable." 
His dislike was shared by Charlotte Bronte: "Why do you like Miss Austen so very much?" she wrote to G.H. Lewes in 1848. 
"I should hardly like to live with her ladies and gentlemen, in their elegant but confined houses." 
But, then, a British critic named James Lorimer writing about "Wuthering Heights" made it plain he couldn't take Charlotte Bronte or her sister Emily: "Here all the faults of 'Jane Eyre' (by Charlotte) are magnified a thousand fold, and the only consolation which we have in reflecting upon it is that it will never be generally read." 

   Critics pummeled Walt Whitman vilely: "He is morally insane, and incapable of distinguishing between good and evil, virtue and crime"; "as unacquainted with art as a hog is with mathematics." 
Mark Twain's "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" was curtly dismissed as "A gross trifling with every fine feeling. . . . 
Mr. Clemens has no reliable sense of propriety." 
And another critic dismissed Twain himself: "A hundred years from now it is very likely that 'The Jumping Frog' alone will be remembered." 

   But then, Twain also could be a lethal critic, especially when it came to James Fenimore Cooper: "In one place in 'Deerslayer,' and in the restricted space of two-thirds of a page, Cooper has scored 114 offences against literary art out of a possible 115. 
It breaks the record." 

   Edgar Allen Poe's writing offended Leslie Stephen, who in his 1874 book, "Hours in a Library," stated: "After reading some of Poe's stories one feels a kind of shock to one's modesty. 
We require some kind of spiritual ablution to cleanse our minds of his disgusting images." 

   Twentieth-century American critics weren't nearly so hyperbolic, but they were just as misguided. 
Clifton Fadiman, writing in The New Yorker, described William Faulkner's 1936 novel "Absalom, Absalom" as "The final blowup of what was once a remarkable, if minor, talent." 
In 1925, a critic wearily discharged F. Scott Fitzgerald: "A little slack, a little soft, more than a little artificial, 'The Great Gatsby' falls into the class of negligible novels." 

   "Rotten Reviews" also includes excerpts from rejection letters; they're amusing in retrospect, but must have been terribly alarming to the recipients. 
I wonder how Rudyard Kipling felt getting this from the San Francisco Examiner in 1889: "I'm sorry, Mr. Kipling, but you just don't know how to use the English language." 
My favorite is this one: "My dear fellow, I may perhaps be dead from the neck up, but rack my brains as I may I can't see why a chap should need thirty pages to describe how he turns over in bed before going to sleep." 
That was Marc Humblot, French editor, in a rejection note to Marcel Proust in 1912. 

   Will authors, impaled on the ends of critics' pens, find comfort reading these things? 
Probably not. 
Perhaps it's better they adopt a philosophical attitude -- several splendid ones can be found in the back of "Rotten Reviews" in quotes from authors about book reviewing. 
Kurt Vonnegut Jr.'s, for example: "I have long felt that any reviewer who expresses rage and loathing for a novel is preposterous. 
He or she is like a person who has just put on full armor and attacked a hot fudge sundae or banana split." 
Or Andre Gide's: "A unanimous chorus of approval is not an assurance of survival; authors who please everyone at once are quickly exhausted." 

   But I believe this one by E.M. Forster is the truest: "Some reviews give pain. 
This is regrettable, but no author has the right to whine. 
He was not obliged to be an author. 
He invited publicity, and he must take the publicity that comes along." 

   ---
   Mr. Crabb is an editor on the Journal's editorial-page staff. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
