ID: 302	RANK: 62	SCORE: 9.709580
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880624-0168 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Theater: Repertory Madness </HL>
<AUTHOR> Edwin Wilson </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Boston  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In 1625, Charles I became king of England. 
Four years later he dissolved Parliament, which 13 years after that stripped him of power. 
Seven years later Charles was beheaded. 
It was a turbulent time in English history and the theater reflected it. 

   In the 25 years after Shakespeare's death, audiences demanded more and more violence and ever-increasing decadence and cynicism in the plays they saw. 
One of the playwrights who filled the need most effectively was John Ford, especially in "'Tis Pity She's a Whore" (1633), in which Ford took immorality and intrigue about as far as they can go. 
The production on the boards through this weekend at American Repertory Theatre (ART) is an audacious yet thoroughly professional revival of this dark and twisted play. 

   The young Giovanni is in love with his sister, Annabella, who returns his love willingly and with passion. 
Since incest is a universal taboo, it is hard to imagine having any sympathy for the young lovers, but one of Ford's perverse achievements is to make the other characters in the play so venal and duplicitous that Giovanni and Annabella's actions appear almost acceptable by comparison. 

   Regardless of our feelings about the characters, the question remains that the action might seem so remote to modern audiences that they will have difficulty relating to it. 
Director Michael Kahn has found an answer to this, however. 
The play is set in Italy, and Mr. Kahn has moved the action ahead 300 years to the Italy of Mussolini in the late 1920s. 
Frequently such transformations are gratuitous, but in this case the change is strikingly effective. 

   Giovanni (Derek Smith) is a young rebel in a long leather coat and loafers with no socks; the women, especially a scheming, murderous vamp named Hippolita (Sandra Shipley), wear '20s-style cocktail dresses, fur-collared coats and cloche hats; and the father of Giovanni and Annabella, Florio (Jeremy Geidt), is a Mafioso Don with pearl gray fedora and a pinky ring. 
In one scene Florio is ensconced in a barber chair, having a haircut while he does business with his cronies. 

   The backdrop of fascism, complete with Mussolini's brown shirts, a decadent aristocracy, and the looming presence of organized crime, gives the bloody events of the play tremendous relevancy. 
One recognizes an immediate parallel with the drama of our own day, especially films of unrelenting violence. 
The period of "'Tis Pity" has other, equally troubling echoes in the 20th century. 
In the play, the foundations of society -- the family, government, religion -- are crumbling. 
The church, for example, is represented by a friar (Harry S. Murphy) and a cardinal (Tim McDonough) whose answers to rampant betrayal and corruption prove wholly ineffectual. 

   Scene designer Derek McLane has created a backdrop of black marble halls that provides the perfect environment for the play -- cold, formal, elegant -- against which the passion and fever-pitch emotions of the drama unfold. 
By the end of the play a half dozen murders or suicides have occurred and the stage is strewn with bloodied corpses. 
If the death scenes are excessive, so is the play. 
As this production shows, however, "'Tis Pity" is more than high-flown melodrama; it is also a deeply disturbing study of depravity and human emotions. 

   ART is one of the few resident professional theaters that consistently risks this kind of production. 
ART also is one of the few actual repertory theaters in the country, presenting different plays on alternate evenings. "'Tis Pity," for example, has been shown in tandem with the premiere of an adaptation of "The Fall of the House of Usher," which forms a thematic link with Ford's play in that both deal with incest, though in Poe's story the subject is treated implicitly rather than openly. 

   This new version of "The House of Usher," which plays through mid-July, is a chamber opera with music by Philip Glass and a libretto by Arthur Yorinks. 
Mr. Yorinks worked for 10 years with the American Mime Theater, which may explain why so much of the action of the opera is in pantomine. 
There are long stretches of the piece for which Mr. Glass has written music but Mr. Yorinks has provided no words and only indicated action. 
This proved to be a mistake, primarily because the director of the opera is Richard Foreman, a man famous for creating eccentric stage tableaux whether in his own work or that of someone else. 

   In the Poe short story, Roderick Usher, sinking further and further into despair, sends for his old friend William to cheer him up. 
Shortly after William arrives at the forbidding house of Usher, Roderick's wraith-like sister, Madeline, dies and is buried in the family vault. 
Madeline, however, soon reappears: Either she was never dead or she has come back to life. 
Shortly thereafter both brother and sister expire once and for all. 

   Mr. Glass's music bears his signature of rhythmic repetitions in the strings against which the clarinet, flute and bassoon provide dancing arpeggios. 
It effectively creates the mysterious, world-weary atmosphere that beats down on Roderick's soul. 
The vocal numbers too, especially trios of the three principals, are largely successful. 

   As for Mr. Yorinks's libretto, it is spare and to the point. 
Unfortunately, as I say, a great deal of it is action indicated in stage directions rather than sung. 
In one scene, for example, William is asleep when a window bursts open and the curtains flap wildly. 
The stage direction reads: "Realizing it was a dream, William gets up, closes the window, then gets back in bed, again to fall asleep . . . 
William wakes up and sees the door to the room opening. 
Roderick and Madeline enter the room." 
Against the background of Mr. Glass's music this could be a gripping, straightforward scene. 

   For Mr. Foreman, though, nothing is straightforward. 
William's bed is tilted at almost a 45-degree angle, and when he, or any of the other characters begin to move they have been directed either to thrash about the stage like madmen or to engage in ridiculous posturing. 
Such an overlay of directorial impasto is both superfluous and hopelessly distracting. 
"The Fall of the House of Usher" is baroque and fantastic enough on its own without embellishment. 
Despite Mr. Foreman's antics, however, "The House of Usher" is worth seeing to experience the way in which Mr. Glass and Mr. Yorinks have captured the spirit of Poe's strange tale. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
