ID: 302	RANK: 80	SCORE: 8.907761
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880129-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Debussy: Letters and 'Pelleas' </HL>
<AUTHOR> Manuela Hoelterhoff </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   If Claude Debussy had composed music as swiftly as he wrote letters, he would have been less depressed and much richer. 
In addition to those delicately written billets-doux of musical modernism, "Pelleas et Melisande," "Afternoon of a Faun" and "Claire de Lune," the composer also left sheafs of correspondence in a minor key, notes to friends and foes filled with hapless chords and lonesome measures. 
"And so back to cultivating my garden of melancholy and lining up bars by the kilometer," he wrote in 1898 to his publisher, who could have cheered him up by sending him an advance. 

   Music and money are the two major themes flowing through "Debussy Letters" (edited by Francois Lesure and Roger Nichols; Harvard University Press, 355 pages, $27.50). If the composer stared at empty staves for days, he had no palpitations writing words about music, his own and those of "pork butchers" -- his shorthand for most of his competitors:
   ". . . you cannot imagine the work's total absence of taste -- what you might call 'the triumph of the Brasserie.' 
It smells of tobacco and there are whiskers all over it," he snuffles cheerfully about a work set in Montmartre by Gustave Charpentier, the "composer of chlorotic cantilenas" (but to others the beloved composer of that diva-pleasing aria, "Depuis le jour.") 

   Debussy had his secretive, asocial side (he once turned down a party invitation from Marcel Proust!), but letters to the composer Ernest Chausson, violinist Eugene Ysaye and poet Pierre Louys give a fascinating view of the composer creating, complaining, explaining, entertaining. 
And the translation by Mr. Nichols deftly catches Debussy's quirky imagery and lapidary style. 
Come visit me by taking the Avenue Alphand, which "runs between sinister banks of dressed stone," he implores a friend, sounding like Mallarme. 

   Arranged chronologically, the letters begin in 1884, when Debussy won the prestigious Prix de Rome competition, and conclude a few months before his death of cancer in 1918. 
Often they read like a diary. 
One evening, he dines with Andre Gide, "an old spinster, timid, gracious and polite in the English way." 
On another day, he runs into Stravinsky, "a young savage who wears noisy ties and kisses the ladies' hands while stepping on their toes." 

   But don't look here for intimate details of the composer's private life. 
There is almost nothing juicy about the two women who (consecutively) botched killing themselves with revolvers when he left them for other melo-molls. 
Domestic life, he sighs in periodic understatement, is not for him. 

   His heart belonged to the muse. 
He liked to picture himself strolling down Parisian boulevards, protecting her from pawing German composers."Musicien francais," he called himself, and his letters are peppered with caustic references to the arch-Hun Richard Wagner. 
Unlike so many of his friends who swooned all the way home from Bayreuth, he considered Wagner an Alp of a roadblock on the way to modern music, which he defined with his own subtly evocative, impressionistic compositions. 

   As Debussy got sicker and World War I turned bloody, his letters show an increasing distrust of music's future, which belonged, he feared, to fetid crowds roaring approval for bombastic trash mostly written by Austro-Germans. 
He bemoaned the loss of "graceful profundity . . . emotion without epilepsy" and struggled to finish his operatic setting of Edgar Allan Poe's "The Fall of the House of Usher." 
That would have been a very quiet piece indeed, since one of the leading roles is not just pianissimo but mute. 
The only opera he did complete was thus the sing-songy, intentionally undramatic (and, to some listeners, deadly dull) "Pelleas." 
Debussy's letters about its creation are livelier than the thing itself. 
About the conductor of the opera's first night, he wrote: "They waited respectfully for Busser to arrive, looking like a man heading for a cold bath and not relishing the prospect." 

   Not surprisingly, Debussy died feeling he had not seen an ideal production of "Pelleas." 
I seem headed toward the same fate. 
But, to be fair, it is not easy to create a convincing stage version of "Pelleas's" kingdom of old Allemonde, a wispy world of shadows and sighs and faintly ridiculous people forever saying they are lost or not feeling well at all. 
Even so, I can imagine something more spellbinding than the elderly production now in partial resuscitation at the Metropolitan Opera with Frederica von Stade and Douglas Ahlstedt (who replaced the indisposed Anthony Rolfe Johnson on the first night). 

   For three hours the lovers trudged through acres of messily painted, twinkling leaves, Ms. von Stade looking increasingly haggard, Mr. Ahlstedt's pleasing tenor waning by the minute. 
During their frequent rest stops, say at the fountain where Melisande drops her ring, we waited in vain for signs of the passion that putatively drew them together for this lugubrious, tenebrous trek. 
They did not look much at each other or even draw inspiration from conductor James Levine who, after a sickly start, began pulling hues out of the orchestra. 

   So this was not an evening when Debussy's softly sensuous sound did more than susurrate sweetly somewhere between you and the fabulous invalids on stage. 
Things did pick up, however, once Pelleas was out of the way and Melisande started to die, a long process. 
I had looked forward to this scene. 
Yet when Ms. von Stade sang of winter's setting sun there really was a feeling of something happening that was very sad and inexplicable. 
Jose van Dam was quite agonizing to watch as Golaud, the husband whose terrifying jealousy ruins everything. 
And the opera's last lines were given soothingly by John Macurdy as Arkel, the king of Allemonde, in a singularly silly nightshirt. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
