ID: 285	RANK: 70	SCORE: 13.500463
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880616-0053 </DOCNO>
<HL> Business Bulletin: A Special Background Report On Trends in Industry And Finance </HL>
<AUTHOR> Lynn Asinof </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> ECO BVG </IN>
<TEXT>
   FEWER ECONOMISTS see a recession coming soon. 

   Just 54% of economists polled recently by Blue Chip Economic Indicators predict a recession by the end of 1989. 
Some 12% say it won't arrive until at least 1991. 
That's a big change since February and November when 78% and 87%, respectively, were predicting a recession by the end of 1989. 
Nobody in November and only 2% in February saw recession staying at bay until 1991. 
Why the change? 
"It's simply that the economy has done better than people expected," says Edward Hyman of C.J. Lawrence &amp; Co. 

   Donald Straszheim of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets predicted a "negative first quarter" in 1988; it didn't materialize. 
He now says recession -- two consecutive negative quarters -- will come in 1989's second quarter, one quarter later than in his previous forecast. 
Edward Yardeni of PrudentialBache Securities Inc. is increasingly optimistic. 
He says full-scale recession is now passe, replaced by "rolling recessions" that strike individual economic sectors. 

   Some remain pessimistic. 
Irwin Kellner of Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. says recession has already begun. 

   FATHER'S DAY messages may vary, but the gifts remain the same. 

   Cards for step-fathers, father-like friends, and even single mothers are taking up a larger portion of card-shop Father's Day displays. 
Hallmark Cards Inc., Kansas City, Mo., says more of its 900 different Father's Day cards are aimed at the "new dad" this year. 
With more baby-boomers becoming fathers for the first time, cards for new fathers and fathers-to-be are hot sellers, says American Greetings Corp., Cleveland. 

   But gifts remain traditional. 
Bud Devito of Old Greenwich Sport Shop, Old Greenwich, Conn., says he's "sold the same thing for the past 32 years: shirts, shorts and socks." 
Crate and Barrel's downtown San Francisco store reports strong sales for "good old-fashioned barbecue goods," hammocks and beer mugs. 
FAO Schwarz offers "traditional" toys to remind dad of his childhood such as a $300 radio-controlled sailboat. 
A "perennial favorite," says Julie Berry of Hammacher Schlemmer, New York: the double-buffer shoe polisher. 

   SHAREHOLDER OPPOSITION to anti-takeover provisions grows stronger. 

   Anti-poison-pill resolutions at 19 companies won the support of 35.7% of the shares voted. 
That's 9.2 percentage points higher than last year, when 32 proposals drew an average vote of 26.5%, says the Investor Responsibility Research Center, Washington, D.C. 
One resolution -- at Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. -- won a majority, attracting 59% of shares voted. 
Anti-greenmail resolutions also fared better, with one at Gillette Co. winning 54.3% of shares voted. 

   One reason for success: Proponents targeted only companies held largely by institutions, says John Wilcox of proxy solicitor Georgeson &amp; Co. 
The California Public Employees' Retirement System, for example, submitted resolutions only to companies where more than 70% of stock was institutionally held, up from 60% last year. 
The result: Its proposals won an average of 44.6% of shares voted, up from 26.3% in 1987. 

   Resolutions aren't binding, but the strong vote could make companies more willing to discuss these issues, says the the research center's Peg O'Hara. 

   TOO MANY EXPERTS? 1st Class Expert Systems Inc., Wayland, Mass., heralds a new product with this announcement: "Expert-development-system development expert develops expert-training system for would-be expert-system experts." 

   JUMBO JACKPOTS haven't materialized yet for New York's revamped Lotto game. 
In April, officials increased the field of numbers to 54 from 48, saying higher odds would boost jackpots. 
But average first-prize winnings are up only $69,000, to $5.6 million. 

   COUNTRY-CLUB ROLLS rose slightly in 1987, while city-club membership dropped a bit, says consultant Pannell Kerr Forster. 
The biggest changes: a 1.7% rise in country-club membership in the Far West and a 3.1% drop in city clubs in the South. 

   MUSEUMS GRAPPLE with requests for the return of American Indian artifacts. 

   Efforts to reclaim ceremonial objects and human remains are on the rise, changing museum exhibits across the country. 
"A significant number of museums have ceased to display skeletal remains," says Renard Strickland of the Southern Illinois University law school, Carbondale. 
The Smithsonian Institution is now returning all human remains that have a personal identity. 
Other museums are also giving back artifacts or making ceremonial objects in their collections available for tribal use. 

   The issue is not new. 
Cases involving the return of Iroquois wampum belts have been in the courts since the 1950s. 
But "the number of requests has increased over the last year-and-a-half," says Joallyn Archambault, director of the American Indian Program at the Smithsonian. 
A new policy at the American Association of Museums is "nudging" museums to take responsibility, says Kathy Dwyer, program director. 

   But determining who should get an artifact can be difficult because the Indian community is "very complex," Ms. Dwyer says. 

   BRIEFS: Cajun Cola, Shreveport, La., offers a spiced soft drink that comes in regular, "blackened" -- or extra spicy -- and diet varieties. . . . 
To make it easier to separate bottles and cans, JED Products Corp., Teaneck, N.J., sells a $3.99 trash-can divider so people can fit two bags in one can. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
