ID: 285	RANK: 79	SCORE: 13.151274
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861217-0104 </DOCNO>
<HL> Was Wrights' Flight
83 Years Ago Today
Really Wrong Flight?
---
Claim of an Earlier Success
In Connecticut Is Pressed,
But Smithsonian Demurs
---
By Patrick Wallace
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/17/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT </IN>
<TEXT>
   Would you believe that man's first flight in a self-propelled aircraft occurred along the Long Island Sound in Connecticut in 1901 -- fully two years before the Wright brothers' flight? 

   Send home your tourists, Kitty Hawk. 
Eat your heart out, Smithsonian Institution: Your treasured Wright Flyer is an interesting artifact but unfortunately was a distant second in man's race to the sky. 

   Well, all of this isn't exactly scientifically proved, but it could be one day, says William O'Dwyer. 
For 23 years, the retired Fairfield, Conn., builder and former Air Force pilot has been searching libraries, old garages and the memoirs of long-dead tinkerers for evidence supporting the claim that Connecticut's Gustave Whitehead flew his fanciful, butterfly-shaped aircraft on Aug. 14, 1901, easily beating out the Wrights, whose first flights were on this day in December of 1903. 

   Mr. O'Dwyer's quest may be quixotic, but it has made the 65-year-old a folk hero in the small German town of Mr. Whitehead's birth, an embarrassing pest to the Smithsonian Institution and the catalyst for some jingoistic jousting between the North Carolina and Connecticut legislatures. 

   The biggest problem for Mr. O'Dwyer is that while Orville and Wilbur Wright kept meticulous records, designs and photographs of their attempts, the best evidence backing the Whitehead flight near Fairfield consists of press accounts that weren't very specific. 

   Four days after Mr. Whitehead's purported adventure, for example, the Bridgeport Sunday Herald carried a full-page account, complete with a drawing of the aircraft. 
The plane, said the Herald, "soared through the air for fully half a mile . . . and settled down from a height of about 50 feet after the propellers stopped." 
Said Mr. Whitehead of his experience: "There is nothing like it." 

   Mr. O'Dwyer believes the Whitehead claims deserve a hearing, and he says the Smithsonian Institution is "dragging its feet" on studying the Whitehead evidence for fear of losing its prime aviation artifact, the Wright Flyer. 
"The Smithsonian should have been doing this work, not us," he declares. 
The museum did start exhibiting a photograph of Mr. Whitehead and his craft in 1983, but the caption claims that his powered aircraft never flew. 

   Connecticut legislators agree with Mr. O'Dwyer. 
The state passed a law earlier this year calling for Smithsonian participation in a public hearing to air the issue. 

   So far, the historians aren't accepting the challenge. 
"It's simply untrue," says Peter Jakab, the curator of early aviation at the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum. 
The museum has been responding to Whitehead claims "for many, many years," he says, and the answer has always been that there isn't positive evidence of the Whitehead flight. 
"The best evidence indicates the Wrights were first," says Mr. Jakab. 
The Smithsonian also says that a public hearing would be "an entirely inappropriate forum" to study historical questions. 

   Aviation buffs still wonder whether Orville and Wilbur's achievement had a precedent. 
At the turn of the century, dozens of would-be aviators were in the race. 
The competition left historians with a maze of conflicting claims, newspaper reports and eyewitness accounts to interpret. 
The Smithsonian initially exhibited a craft designed by Samuel P. Langley as the first one "capable" of flight carrying a man. 
Mr. Langley, who was the secretary of the Smithsonian at the turn of the century, hadn't flown successfully before Kitty Hawk, but a replica of his 1903 craft took to the air in 1914, leading to the claim. 

   The exhibit so infuriated Orville Wright that in 1928 he dispatched the Wright Flyer to a museum in England, where it stayed for 20 years until his death. 
Only in 1942 did the Smithsonian mollify the Wright family by concluding that the Langley craft had been modified for its flight and thus didn't predate the Wrights. 
The museum would soon have the Wright Flyer in its fold. 

   Gustave Whitehead, born Gustav Weisskopf in 1874 in Leutershausen, Germany, first came to Mr. O'Dwyer's attention in 1963. 
As he was renovating a Long Island Sound mansion, the contractor found turn-of-the-century photographs of an early aircraft over Mr. Whitehead's name. 
"I got my Air Force Reserve Squadron to seek information about this local aviator," he says. 
Among other things, the reservists sponsored a contest urging youngsters to "look in your attic, old barns, family photo albums" for Connecticut aviation memorabilia. 
He also met and befriended Stella Randolph, who in 1937 had published a little-known book entitled "The Lost Flights of Gustave Whitehead." 

   Today, a walk-in closet in the O'Dwyers' modest Fairfield home bursts with files of newspaper clippings, testimonials, photographs and correspondence. 
All are neatly indexed and handy for the background sessions Mr. O'Dwyer holds for reporters and other visitors. 
"Sure, I'm trying to get the press interested," he says. 
"The Smithsonian won't listen to me." 

   The collected evidence includes many early articles citing Mr. Whitehead, including a number from the Scientific American. 
And then there is a copy of the contract. 
In 1976, with the help of Sen. Lowell Weicker Jr., Mr. O'Dwyer unearthed from the Smithsonian's archives the 1948 agreement under which the Wright Flyer came back from England for display at the Smithsonian. 
It included a long conditional clause stating that if the museum declared that anyone else flew before the Wrights, it would forfeit the Flyer. 

   The clause prohibits the Smithsonian or its affiliates from displaying any "statement or label in connection with or in respect of any aircraft model or design of earlier date than the Wright Aeroplane of 1903, claiming in effect that such aircraft was capable of carrying a man under its own power in controlled flight." 

   Mr. O'Dwyer promptly co-wrote with Miss Randolph "History by Contract," a book published in Germany that charged the Smithsonian wasn't pursuing the Whitehead claim because it would lose the coveted Wright craft. (Miss Randolph, now over 90 years old, resides in a North Carolina nursing home.) 

   Mr. Jakab of the Smithsonian concedes that museums "generally wouldn't" agree to such terms. 
"It's not good practice to accept artifacts with conditions," he says, but adds: "For an item of particular importance, there is always the possibility of an exception." 
In any case, the historian says, the condition was only an "afterthought" reflecting concerns over the Langley controversy; the overall contract's main purpose was to assuage fears of the Wright estate concerning the tax consequences of the gift, given to the museum for $1. 
Moreover, Mr. Jakab says, "the contract has no bearing on actions of Smithsonian in 1986." 

   Others don't buy that argument. 
"That's just the same old Smithsonian gobbledygook," says George L. Gunther, the Connecticut state senator who sponsored the legislation asking the Smithsonian to participate in a hearing. 
The senator thinks the Smithsonian fears "a Roman circus" type of hearing, but he envisages a sedate, expert panel to review the issue. 
"There won't be any balloons or cheerleaders," Sen. Gunther says. 
"If the experts say we're a bunch of yo-yos, that's fine. 
At least we've had our day in court." 

   In North Carolina, where the Wright Memorial is an important tourist attraction and three million license plates declare the state "First in Flight," the point is not debatable. 
"The controversy was resolved in 1903," says state Sen. Marc Basnight. 
His bill last summer declared the state "aviation's mecca" and "hallowed ground." 
It jocularly noted that Bridgeport, Conn., produced another great promoter, P.T. Barnum. 

   The issue has its serious economic side, however. 
About 450,000 people a year visit the Wright Memorial, and tiny Dare County, which includes Kitty Hawk, had gross tourism receipts of $270 million last year, says Sen. Basnight. 
Bridgeport's tourist revenues, without anything like an aeronautical national monument, are, well, negligible. 

   Mr. Whitehead's birthplace in Germany does have a museum honoring the aviator's memory, however, thanks to the efforts of the Connecticut researchers. 
"They brought us back a piece of our history," says Dieter Gundel, Burgermeister of Leutershausen, a Bavarian town of 5,000 people. 
Mr. O'Dwyer and Miss Randolph were declared "Freemen" of the community, "the greatest honor a city can give," says Mr. Gundel. 
The first Freeman of Leutershausen, Mr. Gundel adds, was a man who walked down the highway in 1945 and talked American troops out of shelling the town. 

   In Bridgeport nowadays, Mr. O'Dwyer is busy on his biggest Whitehead project yet. 
With $10,000 from a Bridgeport marina owner and the off-hours help of a group of engineers, he has built a replica of the Whitehead aircraft. 
In a test last summer, it actually became airborne, though it was tethered over a speeding flatbed truck. 
Actor Cliff Robertson, an aviation buff and friend of the local airport manager, even took a ride. 
And last week, Mr. O'Dwyer says, the craft left the ground briefly under the power of modern engines. 
The group is now working on duplicating Mr. Whitehead's engines, looking toward an actual flight next year. 

   Mr. O'Dwyer concedes that even a successful flight won't resolve the issue, especially in view of the Langley controversy. 
But that doesn't seem to matter. 

   "We've met a lot of new friends and made 23 very nice trips to Germany," says Doris O'Dwyer, the wife who has been living with this obsession for years. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
