ID: 285	RANK: 86	SCORE: 12.878503
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871006-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Architecture: Smithsonian Goes Underground...
---
By Ellen Posner</HL>
<DD> 10/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Washington  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The circumstances were auspicious: two brand new museums of non-Western art for the Smithsonian Institution, built on the National Mall, and designed by the august Boston architectural firm Shepley Bulfinch Richardson &amp; Abbott (founded in the 19th century by the influential American architect Henry Hobson Richardson), with Jean Paul Carlhian, a graduate of France's Ecole des Beaux-Arts, as design principal. 

   But the National Museum of African Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery (for Asian art) also happen to have been built almost entirely underground -- which, considering everything that art museums aspire to be, is an extreme disadvantage. 

   The idea for a mostly subterranean complex in the four-acre garden behind the Smithsonian's original mid-19th-century building came from the respected Japanese architect Junzo Yoshimura, who was awarded the commission but had to give it up because of illness. 
His early drawings were provocative: Large sunken courtyards provided the underground spaces with natural light and views to the outside; substantial and elegantly detailed structures, meant to be ethnically specific, established the museums' identities above ground. 

   It's unlikely that Mr. Yoshimura's design would have survived this city's labyrinthine approval process intact, though. 
For one thing, it ate up most of the garden (which recently had been landscaped with a Victorian theme and had many admirers who were determined it should be preserved). 
There was considerable opposition, too, to the use of architectural forms from the various cultures represented in the museum collections (one government official who thought that a World's Fair look would result asked waggishly where they were planning to put the Guatemalan pavilion). 
And there were some security problems. 
But it is interesting to speculate about how the project might have evolved in Mr. Yoshimura's hands -- and whether something in the Japanese aesthetic would ultimately have helped to bring it off. 

   After Mr. Yoshimura fell ill, the project was ceded to Shepley Bulfinch, his American partners. 
Thus Jean Paul Carlhian, whose training had prepared him to think in terms of great urban spaces, elegant formal sequences, clear axes and dramatic vistas, became the unlikely architect in charge of fitting a cultural facility into a subterranean pit. 

   He did save the garden. 
With the help of a $3 million gift from Enid A. Haupt, it has, in fact, been re-landscaped to a Victorian turn: with plants in patterns, flowers in baskets, pebbled walks, ornamental garden furniture and reproduction 19th-century lampposts. 
The above-ground structures have been made relatively small and symbolically neutral. 
And the museum experience has been buried beneath it all. 

   The National Museum of African Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery are now represented above ground by a pair of vaguely postmodern granite-and-glass entry pavilions that face each other across the garden's newly gated entrance on Independence Avenue. 
Outside, the large, thick spans of good materials, carefully and cleanly worked in oversized geometric patterns, and the decorative copper roofs, do give the buildings some civic presence. 
And inside, they have limestone walls, patterned granite floors, high ceilings, abundant light and wonderful views out to the garden and the surrounding buildings. 
But the expense and energy -- the effort at monumentality -- seem strangely wasted on buildings that are virtually empty and that offer little more than a place to deposit your umbrella. 

   The art is elsewhere: on the first two gloomy underground levels, which are reached by complicated formal stone stairways. 
If Mr. Carlhian had had his way, visitors here would find themselves in large, flexible galleries, some with skylights, and arranged around a single, very large, two-story court that stretched between the museums. 
But after all this had been built, it was radically altered in a way that may have done much to make these spaces the oppressive warrens they are today. 

   The staffs of both museums, most of whom entered the picture after construction was already well under way, decided that the large galleries would overwhelm the objects and the light levels would harm them, and that views across the court would be distracting. 
So they divided the court, lowered some of the ceilings, closed off most of the skylights, and turned the galleries into twilight zones. 
There is no logical path to follow through either museum and no visual relief at all. (The staff cannot be blamed, however, for such oddities as the stairway that comes to a dead end in front of the bathrooms at the second level, leaving a visitor semi-stranded in a narrow hallway.) 

   Although mostly spare and neutral, the galleries do have some finicky postmodern details that make them seem even more constricted. 
And in these spaces, the objects themselves -- particularly some of the fiercely energetic African pieces -- look trapped. 
Or perhaps its just the visitor who feels trapped, constantly aware of being underground and distracted by that feeling. 
And if you happen to forget for a moment that you're underground, there's always the chance that you'll pass the glass pipes left exposed along a corridor wall. 
One, which is filled with filthy yellow water, lets you know that you're walking around under the water table; if the other one starts to fill, it's a sign of danger. 

   Even closer to the center of the earth is a third level, which houses research and education facilities, offices, a lecture hall and so on. 
Its above-ground entry pavilion, which is the best of the three, is a limestone-and-glass cylinder that has a huge parasol-like copper roof and looks, appropriately, like a garden folly. 
From there, however, a skinny neon-striped escalator delves down past the gallery levels to the lower depths and to a tile-and-brick-paved "street" -- which has a fountain, trees in big planters, glassy walkways overhead, and offices lined up behind glass doors like shops. 

   It's unpleasant to see how thoroughly the shopping-mall aesthetic has infected museum buildings, of course, but it is even sadder to realize that people are expected to spend their days working down there. 

   ---
   These new structures join the Smithsonian Institution's ensemble of museum buildings built in various styles along the Mall over the years. 
There were early gems: James Renwick's Gothic sandstone "Castle"; Charles Platt's neo-Renaissance Freer Gallery; John Russell Pope's beauxarts National Gallery. 
And recent lemons: Gordon Bunshaft's inexplicable doughnut-shaped Hirshhorn; I.M. Pei's fundamentally hollow East Building of the National Gallery. 
So it was time for the Smithsonian to regain some ground by creating first-rate architecture. 
If the garden was really more important than the museums, however, the museums should have been built somewhere else. 

   (See related story: "...With Museums for African and Asian Art" -- WSJ Oct. 6, 1987) 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
