ID: 93	RANK: 84	SCORE: 7.723065
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870824-0080 </DOCNO>
<HL> Asia:
China and Tibet: Conquest by Cultural Destruction
---
By John Avedon</HL>
<DD> 08/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The recent visits to Tibet by West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and former U.S. President Jimmy Carter have highlighted China's renewed interest in legitimating its rule over that remote land. 
Although both leaders acknowledged Beijing's dominion, they also called for saving Tibet's threatened identity, a cause now championed by their colleagues at home. 

   On June 18, for example, the U.S. House of Representatives unanimously adopted legislation condemning human-rights abuses in Tibet by China. 
A similar resolution is about to appear in the Senate, followed by pro-Tibet moves in the British Parliament and the West German Bundestag. 
Why, in the face of vigorous State Department opposition -- resistance likely to be felt abroad as well -- should American lawmakers and their European counterparts so suddenly support or even care about Tibet? 

   As introduced by Reps. 
Charles Rose and Benjamin Gilman, the House legislation reveals Tibet's decades of Chinese control: 1.2 million Tibetans killed (a sixth of the population), 6,250 monasteries destroyed with their irreplaceable cultural legacy poured into China's coffers, the continuing presence of a quarter-million Chinese occupation troops and the effective conversion of Tibet's northeastern province, Amdo, into the world's largest gulag, housing by one estimate up to 10 million prisoners. 
Concerned that the current liberalization masks a more effective colonization than that of previous Draconian policies, Congress wants to send a fact-finding mission to Tibet and see a return by Beijing to negotiations with the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government-in-exile. 

   China invaded Tibet in 1949. 
Drawn by a nation the size of Western Europe whose vast mineral, animal and forest reserves were virtually unexploited, the newly victorious communist generals sought to secure a rampart between Asia's two other giants, India and the Soviet Union. 
Half of Tibet's 8,500-man army died fighting China; a nationwide revolt raged thereafter, but by 1959 the Dalai Lama and 100,000 refugees were forced to flee, and the country, placed under martial law, was sealed off from the outside world. 

   In late 1977 Deng Xiaoping, wary of the issue's unresolved status, invited the Dalai Lama to renegotiate Tibet's future. 
As a first step in rapprochement, the Tibetan government-in-exile dispatched three fact-finding missions to more than 500 towns and cities across its homeland. 
In 11 months of travel, the delegates were overwhelmed by hundreds of thousands of compatriots who rioted, illegally breaking through Chinese cordons, detaining the delegates' cars and begging them to inform the world of Tibet's suffering. 
Shocked by the extent of Tibetan nationalism that had survived 30 years of occupation, Beijing rapidly terminated any compromise with the Dalai Lama and instituted the current policy of a massive population influx. 

   There already are 7.5 million Chinese to six million Tibetans in Tibet. 
Though Mr. Deng assured Mr. Carter that the immigrants have been sent to rebuild the country and leave, Beijing's true intent is unambiguously displayed by the construction boom sweeping Chinese sections in every Tibetan city. 

   Moreover, population transfer has been China's preferred means for absorbing conquered territory: In Manchuria, the ratio of Chinese to Manchus is 35 to 1; in Mongolia it's five Chinese to every Mongolian. 
Behind the Disney World diorama of rebuilt monasteries and caretaker monks -- intended to offset international criticism while attracting the tourists Beijing hopes will support its growing community -- Tibet, as a returned Western aid worker ruefully noted, "is finished." 

   If so, the final blow will come from Chinese apartheid. 
Rampant unemployment on top of an annual inflation rate of 300% has rendered Tibet's annual per-capita income just $110. 
Not only does this represent one of the poorest incomes on the planet, it is two-thirds less than that of a Chinese settler there. 
Living in antiquated houses often lacking heat, running water or electricity, Tibetans have an average life span of 40 years and an infant mortality rate of one in six. 
Seventy percent of the adults remain illiterate; only one in five children completes primary school. 

   In contrast, Chinese immigrants receive guaranteed jobs and modern housing. 
Up to two-thirds of the limited school seats are reserved for their offspring, while sufficient diet and medical care is provided to make their average life span 25 years longer than that of Tibetans. 

   The Sinocization of Tibet is no more accidental than its military occupation. 
Given the region's chronic unrest, typified by ongoing executions of political dissidents, the internment of almost 4,000 political prisoners in the capital city of Lhasa, and the presence of one Chinese soldier for every 10 Tibetans in central Tibet alone, Sinocization is the requisite corollary to open force; a subtle but effective means to submerge the identity of Beijing's most intransigent subject race. 

   For China, Tibet has remained critically important, despite becoming a non-issue for the West. 
Covering more than a quarter of China's land mass, the Tibetan plateau houses 40% of China's mineral reserves and close to a third of its nuclear arsenal. 
Tibet policy when misapplied can pack a baleful punch in Beijing's inner circles: Mr. Deng himself was purged in the Cultural Revolution for his Tibet record; the second of the five points cited for Hu Yaobang's recent dismissal was his failure to resolve Tibet's instability. 

   The State Department feels that censoring China on Tibet will compel her assailed moderates to retaliate, weakening America's overall interest. 
This view is not only wrong, it squanders a unique opportunity to strengthen U.S. China policy. 

   A tough stand on human rights in Tibet will remind Chinese leaders that democratic values are as important to the U.S. as arms sales or new contracts. 
At the same time, it will assist Chinese moderates in their current power struggle. 
Armed by resolutions from the U.S. Congress, the Communist Party's right can confront its left with proof that a resurgent radicalism has already eroded foreign support, which both deem essential for modernization. 

   In the long run, the U.S. State Department, Congress and the governments of other nations should recognize the profound geopolitical incentives for raising their voices on Tibet. 
The loss of Tibet's status as an independent buffer state led India to befriend the Soviet Union; China, in return, courted Pakistan. 
The result has been the vexed equation propagating the dramatic political fault lines at the heart of modern Asia. 
Unless Beijing's population transfer into Tibet is halted -- as the Senate legislation calls for -- the tenuous foundations of Central Asian stability, already undermined by the recent India-China military buildup, will inevitably collapse. 

   It is therefore deeply important that the long-dormant question of Tibet be addressed more actively. 
With nearly a half-million troops now engaged along this high plateau -- China's and India's -- finding a formula to restore Tibet's ancient neutrality is in the interest of us all. 

   ---
   Mr. Avedon is author of "In Exile from the Land of Snows: The First Full Account of the Dalai Lama and Tibet since the Chinese Conquest" (Knopf 1984). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
