ID: 295	RANK: 38	SCORE: 14.703254
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880412-0103 </DOCNO>
<HL> Increase in Channels Abroad Opens Market for TV News </HL>
<AUTHOR> John Marcom Jr. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> EUROP JAPAN TBSA NWS CCB GE CBS </CO>
<IN> TEL </IN>
<TEXT>
   Morning television in France is offering a novelty: the "CBS Evening News" with Dan Rather, beamed nightly from New York and shown at 8 a.m. local time. 

   Until Mr. Rather's debut last year on Canal Plus, a privately owned channel, France could watch only French broadcasters delivering a French view of world events. 
For viewers in France and many other countries, the choice of perspectives is widening. 
TV news is going global. 

   In just two years, the proliferation of new TV channels in foreign countries has opened a global market for news programs as satellites have made it easy to transmit them around the world. 
The potential revenue -- and influence -- is luring broadcasters to export entire news shows. 

   Already, Japan sees Mr. Rather and Ted Koppel's "Nightline," as well as assorted other U.S. and British broadcasts. 
Japan, with a new broadcast satellite service hungry for programming, has gone "news crazy," says Armando Nunez, a Capital Cities/ABC Inc. sales executive. 

   Europe's many new channels make it another growth market. 
In dozens of countries, hotel guests can watch Cable News Network, Turner Broadcasting System Inc.'s round-the-clock service from Atlanta. 
Sky Channel, the European cable channel started by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp., plans soon to air bulletins prepared by another Murdoch property, London's Times newspaper. 

   "The TV marketplace internationally has changed so much in the past several years that this is a real growth area," says Sam Roberts, executive director of international broadcast services for CBS Inc.'s news division. 

   Mr. Rather has a long way to go before becoming global ratings champ; in France he garners one rating point, or about 32,000 homes. 
But CBS hopes to use its star to get a foot in the door and sell other specialized news programs. 

   Meanwhile, CNN has an edge in the 24-hour market. 
With its investment in two U.S. news channels, it costs CNN relatively little to beam programs overseas. 
Turner spends about $8 million a year on sales and transmission costs to send a 24-hour signal to Europe; another signal reaches Asia and the Pacific. 

   Turner sells the service to hotels, governments, corporations and cable television systems. 
It also sells to other broadcasters. 
Poland last month began pairing a snippet of CNN coverage each night with a similar excerpt from Soviet TV. 

   But Turner still loses money overseas. 
It hopes by 1990 to make one or two hours a day of international news programs, including possibly a half-hour business news program from Europe. 
"The market is definitely interested in a more comprehensively international product," says Robert Ross, managing director of CNN's London-based international sales company. 

   Britain's Independent Television News Ltd., owned by U.K. commercial broad casters, sees itself as a globally minded alternative to the Americans. 
Last year it developed ITN World News for Super Channel, a British-owned cable TV channel aimed at all of Europe. 
The program downplays British domestic news, drawing on ITN's five foreign bureaus and material gathered by its agency. 
ITN says it is also eager to find a U.S. outlet. 

   Super Channel sells advertising during the program to airlines and computer makers. 
It expects the news to be its first program to pay its own way but, with ad rates as low as 700 pounds (about $1,310) a minute, that hasn't happened yet. 

   Neither Super Channel nor its major rival, Mr. Murdoch's Sky Channel, is making money, prompting speculation about both channels' futures. 
The uncertain financial prospects echo the early days of U.S. cable, and may deter entrants. 

   Still grounded is the BBC. 
The British government, after deliberating 18 months, recently declined to ante up 3.4 million pounds ($6.4 million) for a World Service on television. 
The publicly supported BBC plans to seek private money, but the delay "puts us at an enormous commercial disadvantage," says Alan Macdonald, who oversees the BBC's efforts. 
But, with a weekly radio audience of 120 million, the BBC maintains no other broadcaster -- certainly not archrival ITN -- equals its "recognition factor." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
