ID: 295	RANK: 61	SCORE: 14.198592
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871125-0037 </DOCNO>
<HL> NBC Will Meet With Turner to Discuss
Infusion for the Cable Firm, Sources Say
---
By Peter Waldman
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GE TBSA TL TCOMA
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN>
<DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Executives of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and National Broadcasting Co. are scheduled to meet Monday in New York to discuss a possible NBC investment of about $400 million in financially strapped Turner. 

   Sources close to both television giants said the proposed investment would give NBC an equity stake of roughly 25% in Turner. 
In addition, cable-TV executives said the transaction being discussed would also establish a new entertainment network on cable that the two companies would operate jointly. 

   Spokesmen for Turner and for NBC, a unit of Fairfield, Conn.-based General Electric Co., declined to comment on the talks, which began a few weeks ago at the initiation of NBC. 
But privately, executives of Turner and other cable-TV concerns said the companies are engaged in "extremely delicate" negotiations that could profoundly alter the status quo in the cable-TV industry -- and could even drive Ted Turner himself from the business. 

   Mr. Turner, chairman and founder of Turner Broadcasting, in June was forced to sell a 37% stake in the company to a consortium of major cable operators, in order to pay huge debt from the company's 1986 acquisition of MGM/UA Entertainment Co. 
The cash infusion bought the cable operators, led by Time Inc.'s American Television &amp; Communications Corp. unit and Tele-Communications Inc., seven seats on Turner's 15-member board and veto power over major projects. 
Now, industry executives say the powerful cable operators want Mr. Turner out, NBC in, and a redistribution of the Turner spoils. 

   "They want to make him one of the richest people in the world and take him out," said one cable executive. 

   In addition to a possible buy-out of Mr. Turner -- which some insiders say the brash entrepreneur might resist -- the cable operators, NBC and Turner executives are discussing possible roles for NBC and Time at Turner's Cable News Network. 
Both media companies have shown interest in owning CNN -- NBC actually tried to invest in the network in 1985 -- but Mr. Turner has steadfastly resisted outsiders in the news channel, his most successful television venture. 

   Now, however, he may have no choice. 
Associates say Mr. Turner is anxious to cut a deal with NBC, in order to facilitate the restructuring of Turner's $1.4 billion of junk-bond debt and to enhance the prospects of his latest pet project, a proposed entertainment network dubbed Turner Network Television. 

   But to tie-up with NBC, Mr. Turner needs the consent of the cable companies represented on his board -- each of which has its own agenda. 
Time's agenda, sources say, is to get editorial control of CNN and make it a new showcase for the company's vast news output. 

   "That would be a bitter pill for Ted to swallow," said one executive, "but Time may insist on it as a condition of the NBC deal." 

   NBC, meanwhile, wants CNN, too, and executives say an NBC-Turner transaction could founder on a clash between Time and NBC over who gets the news channel. 
One executive speculated that a possible compromise would involve NBC taking over CNN's news bureaus and other hard assets and then supplying CNN with tape, while Time runs the channel's editorial operations. 
"That's everybody's happy ending," said one investment banker privy to the discussions. 

   Indeed, complicating the NBC-Turner talks is the intense suspicion and rivalry among the various parties involved. 
In addition to the Time-NBC duel for CNN, Time's American Television &amp; Communications unit and Tele-Communications, which hold the largest Turner stakes and also dominate the cable industry with the most subscribers, are fierce competitors. 
According to one cable executive, Tele-Communications' aggressive president, John Malone, is wary of a larger Time role in cable programming -- it already owns Home Box Office -- but is ready to support a Time role in CNN, if that's what it takes to get NBC into Turner. 

   "The cable operators see NBC as a knight on a white horse with regard to the new network," said one executive. 
As previously reported, this fall Mr. Turner tried to sell the cable operators on Turner's board on a proposed network featuring his MGM/UA library and big-time sporting events, but the operators told him that wasn't enough. 
He then started talking with NBC. 

   One crucial question surrounding the Turner-NBC talks is what, exactly, is Mr. Turner now seeking for himself. 
Though considerably weakened by having to share power with Turner's cable board members, the cable magnate still posseses 51% of the company's stock and more than enough guile and guts to make life miserable for almost any predator, associates say. 
Indeed, some say he's looking for a way, through an NBC tie and a new network, to recoup his past glory as cable's most far-sighted visionary. 
"Ted is not going to go away," said one executive close to Mr. Turner. 

   But other associates note that the flamboyant yachtsman, who built Turner Broadcasting from an Atlanta billboard company, is going through a difficult and costly divorce from his second wife and seems ready to bow out. 
These executives say he's positioning himself for the best offer he can get, which is likely forthcoming, given some powerful cable operators' determination to buy him out. 

   One executive with knowledge of the situation hazarded a "scientific" guess that the cable operators -- with perhaps NBC -- will buy Mr. Turner out for $840 million. 

   (Revised WSJ Nov. 27, 1987)
</TEXT>
</DOC>
