ID: 295	RANK: 99	SCORE: 13.573084
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870112-0067 </DOCNO>
<HL> Turner May Sell Shares in Broadcaster
To Cut $1.35 Billion Debt, Keep Control
---
By Timothy K. Smith and Laura Landro
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TBS TCOMA TL
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Ted Turner is asking his best customers for an infusion of capital -- evidently to help him pay debts and keep control of his company. 

   Mr. Turner's company, Turner Broadcasting System Inc., said it is talking with a group of cable TV operators about selling an equity stake. 
If the cable companies buy shares in the Atlanta-based broadcaster, the cash could enable the company to pay down the massive debt it incurred to buy MGM/UA Entertainment Co. without selling operations. 

   Selling a stake also could enable Turner Broadcasting to redeem some of the preferred stock it issued as part of the financing for the $1.5 billion acquisition last March. 
The preferred stock is to begin paying dividends in the form of common shares June 1. 
Mr. Turner currently holds about 81% of Turner Broadcasting's common stock; the dividend on the preferred shares, about half of which are held by investor Kirk Kerkorian, eventually could make Mr. Turner a minority holder in the company he built. 

   Selling a stake to cable operators also would reduce Mr. Turner's control, but using proceeds from the sale to redeem preferred stock could enable him to retain at least 51%. 
Mr. Turner often has said he wouldn't allow his Turner Broadcasting stake to fall below 51%. 

   Analysts say one enticement for cable operators is keeping Turner Broadcasting, an important programming source, independent. 
Industry specialists also noted that cable operators might view the company as a vehicle for fulfilling their desire to form a programming network of their own. 

   Turner Broadcasting didn't say how much money it is trying to raise or identify the cable operators currently involved in any talks. 
But according to cable industry executives, most of the dozen or so leading concerns have been approached. 

   "I don't think Turner is jumping into a life raft right now, but he has to steer the ship if he wants to stay away from the icebergs," said Kenneth Berents, an analyst at Legg Mason Wood Walker Inc. in Baltimore. 

   Turner Broadcasting took on $1.4 billion in debt to buy MGM, and currently has about $1.35 billion of debt outstanding. 
The company said it has sufficient cash flow to cover the debt payments, but they are a heavy drag on earnings. 
In the first nine months of 1986, interest expenses of $143.6 million contributed to a net loss of $121.4 million, compared with net income of $5 million, or 37 cents a share, a year earlier. 

   Those results have helped drive down the value of the company's stock. 
On Friday, Turner Broadcasting common shares closed at $18 in trading on the American Stock Exchange, up $2.875. 
The stock traded at a high of $29.25 in June. 

   Trading in Turner Broadcasting preferred stock was heavy last week; on Wednesday it was the most active Amex issue. 
Mr. Kerkorian, who received about half of the company's 53 million preferred shares outstanding when he sold his MGM stake to Turner Broadcasting, was rumored to be buying more of them. 
Officials of Tracinda Corp., Mr. Kerkorian's investment company, couldn't be reached for comment. 

   The leader in any cable investment consortium is expected to be the nation's largest cable company, Denver-based Tele-Communications Inc., which already owns about 3% of Turner Broadcasting. 
Its chairman, John Malone, declined to comment Friday, but said several times during Turner Broadcasting's recent troubles that his company would be prepared to bail the broadcaster out in order to save the cable programs that it produces -- notably Cable News Network. 

   As previously reported, Turner was discussing the sale of a stake in Cable News Network last year with a number of companies, including Time Inc. and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. "Tele-Communications has always taken the position that they would do something if CNN was to change hands," said Dennis Leibowitz, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp. "They've been scared that Time or Murdoch would get control of CNN." 

   But Time, which owns 80% of the second-largest cable company, American Television &amp; Communications Inc., also could be an ally of Tele-Communications in any Turner Broadcasting investment. 
A Time spokesman said the company has been "contacted" regarding a stake, but declined to elaborate. 
A spokesman for Atlanta-based Cox Communications Inc., another cable operator, said it also had been approached. 

   Both Time's cable unit and Tele-Communications have been active lately in attempts to band with other cable operators to produce network-quality programs for cable. 
Industry analysts note that Turner Broadcasting, with its programming expertise, could be used as such a vehicle by the operators. 

   "By putting equity into Turner, the cable operators could both solve Turner's problem and use his operations as a means of fulfilling their desire to collectively put money into cable television programming," Mr. Leibowitz said. 

   In any event, talk of a broad cable consortium to invest in Turner Broadcasting appears to be preliminary. 
Julian Brodsky, an executive at Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.-based Comcast Corp., said that while his company has heard from other cable concerns and "agents" of the broadcaster, the overtures were "vague," and "there hasn't been any real official contact or discussion yet." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
