ID: 117	RANK: 1	SCORE: 20.878475
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871124-0142 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- The Gallery:
One Poet's Wide World: In Word and Picture
---
By Manuela Hoelterhoff</HL>
<DD> 11/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In 1792, young William Wordsworth, in Paris and all heated up with revolutionary ardor, was ready to offer his words, his self, his very life to the Girondist party. 
His appalled family threatened to cut off his allowance, and so he went home, his saved head soon reverberating with "Tintern Abbey." 
The Girondists in the meanwhile mostly headed up the long steps to the guillotine, dispatched there by Robespierre and the Jacobins. 

   Now this near-martyr who is more often remembered as the fuddy-duddy who lived in cozy comfort at Dove Cottage with his doting sister Dorothy, is the hero of a new show at the New York Public Library: "William Wordsworth and the Age of English Romanticism." 
His long poems and long life (1770-1850) thread together some 300 manuscripts, books, paintings, drawings and prints from 70 libraries, museums and private lenders. 

   It is a superbly interesting show, a model even, in its tasteful design and the intelligent way it links words and images to show all aspects of Romantic thought and sensibility. 
Gallery walls do not glow with a fashionable, lurid pastel color; the catalog can be lifted by an able-bodied person; the wall labels aren't written in the impenetrable artspeak typical of the genre. 
Wordsworth, who thought poetry should be accessible to clodhoppers and to academics, would like this show. 

   The discovery of nature as a theme, the role of memory and the sublime, are probed skillfully in a display that begins with the French Revolution -- "The master theme of the epoch in which we live," as Shelley called it. 
He penned his own Declaration of Rights for the oppressed of England, but, always a bit impractical, disseminated the list in toy boats and homemade hot-air balloons. 
Then he untethered himself from British soil, moving to Italy like so many of the Romantic-era poets -- think of Keats, who expired in a house by Rome's Spanish Steps, or Lord Byron, whom we see in the famous portrait showing him in his resplendent Albanian fighting regalia. 

   Perhaps the rarest autograph in the show is a hastily scrawled page from Shelley's "The Triumph of Life," lent by the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
It shows how, having framed the question "And what is life, I cried?" 
Shelley changed "And" to "Then" and "cried" to the more moderate "said." 
He never composed the answer. 
We are looking at his last poem. 
Not much later, at age 29, he drowned in his skiff, the Don Juan, off the coast of Viareggio. 

   You can read also from a first edition of "Frankenstein," the horror tale penned earlier by Mary Shelley, the wife left behind on the shore. 
Her maudlin monster also questioned life's meaning. 
"Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth from which all men fled . . ." the blob sobs in chapter 31. (Yes! he discovers soon enough.) 
Her mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, gazes glumly out of a portrait. 
An early feminist, she died in 1797 depressed by the Revolution's failure to amplify the rights of women. 

   But to hear with what boundless joy revolutionary France was regarded just a few years earlier you can count on Wordsworth. 
"Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive. 
But to be young was very heaven!" he wrote in his autobiographical poem "The Prelude" without giving any of the juicy details of his doubtless heavenly youthful affair with Annette Vallon. 

   She was the mademoiselle he left behind in France, pregnant with Anne-Caroline. 
She crops up in two letters that have never before been exhibited because they were intercepted by a revolutionary watchdog committee and filed away in a provincial archive. 
In the primmest of scripts, she begs her hotly missed William not to forget "Your Annette who kisses you a thousand times on the mouth." 
Good lord. 
How hard it is to associate such ardor with the bland gent who looks like he has earthworms on his head in the odd portrait bust at the show's entrance. 

   At least Annette survived. 
An exquisite little painting by Jean-Jacques Hauer shows another French lady friend of Wordsworth who did not: Madame Rolland sits in her drawing room with her harp, pet dog and Lafayette. 
Plucky to the last, she managed a much-quoted line before tied down to the plank: "Ah, Liberty! 
How hast thou been sported with!" she said, prompted by a statue of Liberty erected near the guillotine. 
Louis XVI, in contrast, got off no bon mots at all. 
A drum corps had been ordered to drown him out as he reached the top of the scaffold depicted in another painting. 

   Such bloody spectacles did not give a boost to fashionable theories about the perfectibility of man. 
Many sensible poets and painters turned away from politics and took stock of nature, which needed no further perfection in England then. 
Proof is all around you in this show, with its splendid landscapes by John Sell Cotman, Samuel Palmer and most of all, John Constable, who shared Wordsworth's feelings for the simple felicities of the countryside. 

   "For I have learned," wrote Wordsworth, "To look on Nature not as in the hour/Of thoughtless youth, but hearing often times/The still, sad music of humanity." 
The passage is from "Tintern Abbey," and the bare, ruined choirs of the place itself can be seen, gorgeously dilapidated, in an early watercolor by J.M.W. Turner, one of the show's many superb works by this poet of light and color. 

   More often, as he got older, Wordsworth explored a more private landscape -- the topography of his mind, searching "memory's cells" for inspirational scenes that would billow his sails. 
He worried that his powers were failing, and anyone who has ever read "Is this, Ye Gods, the Capitoline Hill?" written in the 1830s and my favorite worst Wordsworth passage, will know why he did. 
But, paradoxically, his fear of dimming down more often produced stunning rhymes. 
Consider these lines from his "Intimations of Immortality": 

   "What though the radiance which was once so bright/Be now for ever taken from my sight,/Though nothing can bring back the hour/of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower. . . ." 

   "Wordsworth and the Age of English Romanticism" was organized by Jonathan Wordsworth, a descendant of the poet, Michael C. Jaye and Robert Woof. 
The Economist magazine and the National Endowment for the Humanities are the main sponsors; the show stays here through Jan. 2, then heads for the Indiana University Art Museum, Bloomington, Ind. (Jan. 27-March 6) and the Chicago Historical Society (April 6-June 5). 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
