ID: 117	RANK: 15	SCORE: 10.514675
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880429-0017 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Gilding the Lillies in Marvell's 'Garden' </HL>
<AUTHOR> Marie Winn </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   When Boswell asked Dr. Johnson, "What is poetry?" the great man answered, "It is much easier to say what it is not." 
Until a month ago one could have said with confidence that "The Garden," a difficult and beautiful poem by the 17th-century metaphysical poet Andrew Marvell, was not a poem about the interior of a fancy motor car. 
Now, however, according to fast-breaking developments in contemporary textual criticism, such a statement can no longer be made with certainty. 

   While Marvell's most popular poem, "To His Coy Mistress," is clearly about a young man trying to persuade a reluctant beauty to go to bed with him, "The Garden" is more obscure in meaning, prompting great numbers of scholars to explore its tangled thickets in papers entitled "The Garden: Marvell's Cartesian Ecstasy" and the like. 
Various schools of literary criticism have scratched at "The Garden" and described it as a poem exalting the powers of the imagination, a poem exploring the wellsprings of poetic inspiration -- that sort of thing. 
But they may have been hoeing the wrong row. 

   Recently, a variant text of "The Garden" has cropped up, so to speak, in a surprising new context -- a full-page advertisement appearing in millions of copies of Time, the New Yorker and the New York Times Magazine. 
The page shows the elegant interior of an expensive car. 
There, just slightly to the northeast of the leather-covered steering wheel, and west southwest of the burled walnut dashboard trim, are six lines from the second verse of the Marvell poem. 

   We know that these lines are by none other than Andrew Marvell because the name of the poet appears at the end where the author's name is customarily found in poetic quotations. 
We know that they are from "The Garden" because they are hauntingly similar to the verse we studied in school, the one beginning "Fair Quiet have I found thee here/And Innocence, thy sister dear?" 
But the text has undergone a weird metamorphosis: the word "comfort" has replaced "innocence" and the state of solitude once found "delicious" by the poet is now bluntly "luxurious"; thus a poem that once described a state of metaphysical bliss in which "a green thought in a green shade" surpasses all bodily pleasures, now seems to promote something cozy and sensuous, something that costs a lot of money, a wonderful British car, perhaps. 
But surely that isn't what the poet had in mind. 

   Well, that doesn't necessarily matter, according to David Greetham, executive director of the Society for Textual Scholarship and an English professor at the City University of New York. 
When asked how today's scholars might approach an altered version, Mr. Greetham described a form of advanced literary analysis known as Reception Theory, in which "authorial intention has no particular precedence. 
It is just one interpretation of many." 

   He goes on: "If, in the lines from Marvell's 'The Garden,' the car manufacturers had determined that this line is imperfect in their own view of what was necessary, then they could argue that indeed they were merely perfecting the poem and that Marvell would see that this was a better version for this particular purpose than the one he had in fact written. 
It's certainly not an unprecedented condition. 
Many famous texts have been changed in the transmission in order to give more meaning to the original lines." 

   In this case, the "transmitter" of the new variant version of "The Garden" does not deny his role. 
"Yes, I am the copywriting culprit who dared to sully the works of the great English poets," cheerfully admits Martin Macdonald, creative director with the San Francisco advertising firm of Hal Riney &amp; Partners. 
He has had his creative way not merely with Marvell, but also, in other ads, with Wordsworth, Robert Lewis Stevenson, and Hamlin Garland, a poet who can hardly add a "British, upscale atmosphere" to the advertisement, (as Mr. Macdonald puts it), since he was born and raised in Kansas. 
"I suppose Wordsworth and Marvell are spinning in their graves, but in my defense I can only say that these poets are now getting a lot more visibility. 
I was actually expecting a bit of a hue and cry from the literary world," continues Mr. Macdonald, "but so far the only mild protest I've received was from a nice lady in Teaneck, N.J., who really didn't seem too outraged at our small poetic license." 

   Not everyone in the literary world views Mr. Macdonald's variant verses with equanimity. 
Cleanth Brooks, a pioneer of the New Criticism who is now emeritus at Yale, was less than charitable when the advertisement was pointed out to him, saying, "What they've done is really rather obscene, an appeal to the baser emotions in order to sell something." 

   Aileen Ward, Schweitzer professor of the humanities at New York University, also was enraged. 
"Changing the word 'innocence' to 'comfort' is a dreadful comment on the trade-off between the real inspiration of Marvell and the debased standards that his lines are being twisted to uphold." 

   Meanwhile, Geoffrey Hartman, professor of comparative literature at Yale, takes a more benign view: "I suppose they should have said 'With apologies to Andrew Marvell.' 
But I don't really consider it a very grave infringement of morality." 

   All the critics, however, seem to believe that the lines "transmitted" by Mr. Macdonald in his advertising campaign are somehow inferior to the version that appears in anthologies. 
But in defense of the Madison Avenue redaction, Mr. Greetham invokes that venerable principle of textual criticism known as "lectio difficilior," or the more difficult reading. 
Traditional editors of ancient writers used it to choose between variant readings. 
All things being equal, they chose the more difficult version on the theory that somewhere along the line of transmission, someone had simplified a text he couldn't understand. 
Lectio difficilior lives on, somewhat distorted, in the relativistic work of certain contemporary textual scholars. 
As Mr. Greetham puts it: "An author is more likely to produce an impenetrable reading than is the transmitter of that text. 
So if one has two readings, one of which makes sense and one of which does not, then the author's is the one more likely not to make sense." 

   Surely that is what Martin Macdonald of the Hal Riney Agency saw when he recast "The Garden." 
He had the wit to recognize that a green buck makes more sense than a green thought in a green shade. 

   ---
   Ms. Winn is a New York-based freelance writer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
