ID: 117	RANK: 34	SCORE: 8.032458
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890821-0110 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890821 </DD>
<AN> 890821-0110. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
@  Genius Envy: A Byronic Kiss-and-Tell
@  ----
@  By Julie Salamon </HL>
<DD> 08/21/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<TEXT>
   The Romantic poet Lord Byron was born with a crippled foot and a great genius. 
Perhaps compensating for both, he led a multifarious sex life that resulted in repeated bouts with venereal disease. 
In 1816 his publisher, John Murray, recognizing that Lord Byron had become almost as famous for his sexual exploits as for his poetry, thought of a way to capitalize further on his celebrity author. 
Mr. Murray hired John Polidori, a young doctor, to tend to the poet's ailments during his travels -- and to take notes for purposes of a kiss-and-tell biography. 

   Polidori did not end up ghosting the 19th-century equivalent of "The Andy Warhol Diaries." 
His sister cut out the naughty parts. 
Now, however, the novelist and scholar Paul West, imagining what must have been deleted (and possibly more), has come up with the diary that would have put Polidori on the best-seller list of his day. 

   Writing as though he were Polidori (the way Polidori wished he could write), Mr. West has turned in a slyly learned and bawdily obsessive account of one man's fatal attraction for another: "Lord Byron's Doctor" (Doubleday, 277 pages, $19.95). 
Though Polidori had his own talents -- at 20 he was the youngest medical graduate of the University of Edinburgh -- he was a Byronic wannabe. 
He wanted to be lusted after by women and men, to be passionate yet coolly sophisticated and, above all, to be a Famous Writer palling around with other famous writers. 

   Mr. West has a remarkable gift for mimickry; in a previous novel, "The Place in Flowers Where Pollen Rests," he convincingly assumed the voices of Hopi Indians. 
Here he's switched to something altogether different. 
His Polidori speaks with the voice of an entirely believable educated Scotsman living in the early 19th century. 
Not that his Polidori would feel out of place in the late 20th century. 
This young striver would have been thrilled to see his face on the cover of People, had it existed in 1816. 
He's infected with a desire to be somebody else -- anything but a doctor in an age when the leech, not aspirin, was the common remedy of choice. 

   Lord Byron's talent eventually becomes an irritant to Mr. West's Polidori, who is disgusted that so valuable a gift was distributed to a vulgarian, a man whose way of "priming" a chambermaid for sex was to smack her hard in the belly. 
The mewling Polidori is certain that he feels Byronic rages and sorrows, but he is mute and frustrated. 
"I stood there, getting exercised, all for naught," writes West's Polidori. 
"Milord would have spewed forth a poem about it had he been there. 
Out they always came, like a snake's questing tongue. 
Each poem seemed ready-made, and I suspected that he had within him poems stored like baker's loaves. . . ." 


   Mr. West, who has written 11 novels and nine works of nonfiction -- including a study of Byron -- plays his scholarly interest in the Romantic writers and their Gothic literature against his extravagantly mischievous imagination. 
So his Polidori can write just as vividly and acutely about the makings of a Gothic story or the absurdities of 19th-century medicine as he does about Lord Byron's genitalia -- which are a source of endless fascination for the young doctor, who claims to be repulsed by the subject even as he dwells on it with giddy erudition. 

   Ever-complaining and always jealous, Polidori describes himself as a "serf," as "a moon to {Byron's} planet," and trails the poet across Europe to the Villa Diodati, the mansion Byron rented outside Geneva. 
Mr. West clearly is fascinated by the now-legendary time Byron spent at the Villa Diodati with Percy Shelley and his mistress, Mary Godwin, and her half-sister, Claire Clairmont, another Byron groupie (who became pregnant by him). 
Almost half the book is spent there, amid the literary and sexual hijinks that many people have speculated inspired Mary Shelley to write "Frankenstein" the following year. (Mr. 
West isn't the first to be lured by the goings-on at the Villa Diodati. 
Ken Russell's lurid 1984 film "Gothic" was inspired by Villa Diodati and its colorful assortment of hypersexed guests.) 

   Polidori circles around Byron's clique wearing the sneer of the outcast. 
He refers to Shelley as "the Shelley person." 
He has sex with the pregnant Claire after it's become plain that Byron has wearied of them both. 
One starts to sympathize with Byron. 
Even amusing snivelers like Polidori soon wear out their welcome. 

   Mr. West's maneuvering of Polidori's jealousy brings to mind playwright Peter Shaffer's portrait of the Hapsburg court composer Salieri in "Amadeus." 
Mr. Shaffer portrayed Salieri as a competent musician who composed by the book only to be upstaged by a foul-mouthed, "unworthy" prankster named Mozart. 
But unlike Mr. Shaffer, Mr. West doesn't show the slightest bit of sympathy for Polidori's ludicrous envy. 
He simply allows Polidori to debunk the idea that great artists are necessarily great men or women. 
His Byron is a hypochondriac, a sadomasochist, a cold-hearted manipulator who infuriates the tremulous Polidori but gives Mr. West the pleasure of playing with great material -- a pleasure he generously passes along in this always original and entertaining novel. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
