ID: 117	RANK: 4	SCORE: 13.792062
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880119-0064 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: The Fabulous Faker </HL>
<AUTHOR> Lee Lescaze </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   It is one of romantic literature's most flamboyant images. 
The young poet, so beautiful and so talented, driven to swallow arsenic by a callous world, lies dead across his garret bed, his luxurious red hair hanging above a pile of torn manuscript scraps. 
Beauty, death and art! 
Hollywood would call it a socko finish. 

   As Helen's face launched a thousand ships, so Thomas Chatterton's death at 17 launched a thousand elegies. 
Coleridge, Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats and Byron sang his praises. 
French romantics joined in. 
Who else, after all, had so starved, suffered and died for art? 
And so young. 
Wordsworth called him the "marvellous boy" and the phrase stuck in literary memory like a Homeric tag line. 

   Of course, Chatterton was not only a poet, but also a literary counterfeiter who passed off a series of medieval-style poems as the just-discovered work of a 15th-century monk. 
In Peter Ackroyd's brilliant, witty novel, the Chatterton forgeries and tragic death are at the core of a story that cuts back and forth across two centuries. 

   Suppose Chatterton's most audacious deception was not his fake poems, but his 1770 suicide? 
What if instead of dying on his garret bed, Chatterton was a precursor of our century's tribe of disappearing men who, for more mundane reasons such as embezzlement, seemingly drop dead in one life only to surface sipping champagne in Brazil? 

   Suppose Chatterton lived on, not in Brazil, but in an ever-widening world of forgery until he had created hundreds of poems under the names of recently deceased contemporaries? 
Names like Gray, Akenside, Churchill and Blake? 
It would put scholars to work for decades reevaluating 18th-century literature. 
For the discoverer of the great hoax it would bring a measure of literary-world fame. 

   From such questions, Mr. Ackroyd spins a fascinating web of questions, comic and otherwise, about literature and life. 
What is real and what is made up? 
What is original and what is imitation? 
What is valuable? 
What endures? 

   "Chatterton" (Grove, 240 pages, $17.95), which was a No. 1 best seller in Britain last year, is so packed with lively characters, so gracefully written and so adept at mixing wit with learning that no potential reader should be intimidated by its literary source. 
In a page, Mr. Ackroyd supplies all the background needed about Chatterton's short, desperate life and about Henry Wallis's painting of the dead poet, using novelist and poet George Meredith as his model. 
The painting, in London's Tate Gallery, was made some 100 years after Chatterton's death, but it has set the image of Chatterton's deathbed in the minds of generations. 

   Then, Mr. Ackroyd sails into his lively tri-level invention, part exploration of Chatterton's 18th-century life, part 19th-century byplay among egotistical Meredith, romantic Wallis and adulterous Mrs. Meredith, and part contemporary comedy of failed poet Charles Wychwood, well-known novelist Harriet Scrope and their supporting cast caught up in efforts to track down what happened to Chatterton. 

   Mr. Ackroyd is an arch observer of his squalid contemporary scene, a world in which Vivaldi's "Four Seasons" is background music equally at cremations and porn movies. 
Our century is no romantic age. 
Poets don't die pale and beautiful garret deaths. 
They collapse amid the chicken tikka, tandoori mutton and vegetable biryanis in a cheap Pakistani restaurant. 
And, when they rise to the defense of poetry, it is to carping wits eager to mock their eloquence with joking asides. 

   For Harriet, the novelist, old age and a degree of fame have brought her only a jaundiced view of the world. 
Gin-soaked, waspish quips (she mocks friend, foe and stranger alike) dominate her conversation; a desire to buttress her renown at any cost to others dominates her life. 
Characters are as stained as her sofa, but the sofa has an excuse. 
"You'd be stained, too, if you'd been sitting upright for two centuries," Harriet explains. 
Kindness is in short supply. 
"I've given my life to English literature," Harriet remarks. 
Her closest friend quickly jabs: "It's a pity, then, that you didn't get anything in return." 

   It is a world in which everyone plagiarizes, but some prosper while others stumble. 
Some live in fear of being discovered. 
Others blackmail their way to safety. 
Mr. Ackroyd keeps shifting the angle of vision, however, so that all is not despair. 
So what if life is full of imitation? 
If illusion triumphs over reality, what is wrong with that? 
Imagination can conquer grim surroundings. 
Memories can endure. 
Just as Chatterton's fame has long survived his squalid death. 

   Over everyone hovers the spirit of the poet who wrote in his diary: "The truest plagiarism is the truest poetry." 
Or did he? 
Is that his sentence, or another hoax? 
"Without words, there is nothing," Chatterton muses. 
True or false? 

   "Chatterton" is amusing and provocative. 
Only one warning label should be attached lest this novel prompt readers to seek out Chatterton's poems. 
He may have been a "marvellous boy," but the poetry is far from marvelous. 
Let Mr. Ackroyd speak for Chatterton. 
Remember Chatterton the way Mr. Ackroyd, whose inventiveness seems inexhaustible, reinvents him. 

   He saves a wonderful twist for last, one that suggests that in a world where events seem random, romantic legends may spring from anywhere, even from clumsy mistakes. 

   ---
   Mr. Lescaze is the Journal's deputy foreign editor. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
