ID: 117	RANK: 45	SCORE: 7.120511
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880325-0099 </DOCNO>
<HL> Fine Art Is Now on Exhibit in Many Ads --- But Critics Say Commercial Use Cheapens the Great Masterpieces </HL>
<AUTHOR> Ronald Alsop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> MKT </IN>
<TEXT>
   When Edouard Manet unveiled his "Luncheon on the Grass" in 1863, many Parisians were scandalized by the depiction of a nude woman picnicking with two fully dressed men. 

   Times change. 
Today, the painting is being used to sell grocery products and charge cards. 

   "Luncheon on the Grass" turned up in all its glory last year in magazine advertisements for both Rice-a-Roni Savory Classics and the American Express Card. 
"Before Savory Classics, people went to extremes to make meals interesting," quipped the Rice-a-Roni ad. 

   To some art connoisseurs, the ads were demeaning to Manet. 
But at least the French painter is in good company. 
Lately, advertisers have developed an appreciation for fine art: They are using works by Gauguin, Monet, Raphael and many other painters to promote everything from men's cologne to candy bars to bathroom toilets. 

   The burgeoning use of fine art in ads is hotly debated among museum officials, some of whom worry about cheapening the world's greatest masterpieces. 
The National Gallery of Art, in Washington, and the Boston Museum of Fine Arts are among museums that refuse to deal with advertisers -- although that doesn't always prevent marketers from using their paintings. 
At the other extreme are museums that freely license art to ad agencies to help balance their budgets. 

   "Advertisers have become much more interested in our art works, and we study their requests on a case-by-case basis," says Ashton Hawkins, executive vice president of New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
"Unfortunately, some proposed uses are flip and disrespectful." 

   Museum executives most resent advertisers who alter paintings, usually by inserting their products into the picture. 
In a Hershey commercial, a van Gogh self-portrait and a ballerina in a Degas painting are shown holding candy bars. 
American Express Co. inserted a charge-card receipt into the hands of a woman in Georges Seurat's "A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte." 
And for an ad promoting a chunky variety of spaghetti sauce, Prince Co. commissioned a drawing of a chubby Mona Lisa. 

   "Seurat's 'Sunday Afternoon' and Grant Wood's 'American Gothic' have been corrupted in ads so often they've lost their integrity," says Cisley Celmer, an official at the Milwaukee Art Museum. 

   But the Art Institute of Chicago, which owns both works, doesn't object to the parodies. 
"I think the send-ups of our paintings are a riot," says Lyn DelliQuadri, the museum's director of graphics and reproductions. 
The money is nice, too. 
She says the Art Institute rents transparencies of its works to advertisers for fees of $250 to $1,000. 

   For advertisers, art is a way to create an image of quality or luxury for their products. 
Famous paintings lend a touch of class to a brand name, whether it's Doral Saturnia spa in Miami (which uses Botticelli's "The Birth of Venus"), Fancy Feast cat food (Goya's "Don Manuel Osorio de Zuniga") or Sharp office copiers (Raphael's "Portrait of Maddalena Doni"). 

   "Even if you can't afford the best of everything, you can afford the best of one thing," proclaims an ad for Red Devil paint that features a Degas painting. 
In ads headlined "Evolution of the Species," Jaguar Cars Inc. places its autos in lush jungle landscapes evocative of Henri Rousseau. 

   "Putting a product with a masterpiece says more about its quality than any words can express," says Jim Tennant, a creative director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, which created an ad for Porcher bathroom fixtures that featured a work by Henri Matisse. 

   Museum officials and art historians say advertisers' use of classic paintings is a sign that fine art has become a more central part of American culture. 
"The growing popularity of art-history courses in colleges and blockbuster art exhibitions has given the advertising world a new pool of sophisticated imagery on which to draw," says Robert Baldwin, an art historian at Connecticut College. 

   Last spring, the Lintas ad agency in London reacted swiftly to the $39.9 million sale of one of van Gogh's sunflower paintings. 
Within a few days, it commissioned an artist to copy the van Gogh work -- with a tub of Unilever's Flora margarine alongside the vase of sunflowers. 
The ad's tag line: "Very tasty if you've got the bread." 

   Advertisers these days also are trading increasingly on the cultural appeal of classical music and literature. 
A spot for Honda's Accord features a work by Chopin, and opera music is part of ads for wine, fancy perfumes and even laundry detergent. 

   Recently, TV viewers also have heard actress Elizabeth Taylor reciting passages from William Shakespeare and John Dryden in commercials for her Passion perfume. 
And print ads for the Sterling car include poetry by Robert Louis Stevenson, William Wordsworth and Andrew Marvell. 

   But advertisers are making even more use of the world's premier art -- though doing so isn't always easy. 
When marketers want to use a work by a living artist, they merely consult him for permission. 
For a deceased artist whose works aren't yet in the public domain -- generally, one who has been dead for less than 50 years -- advertisers usually must turn to the artist's heirs. 

   "We take into account the propriety of an ad and the amount of the fee to be paid, but rejections occur pretty frequently," says Theodore Feder, president of New York-based Artists Rights Society, which represents museums, artists and their heirs. 
One such rejection occurred when a company wanted to use a Jackson Pollock painting to illustrate the activity of a dental-care product. 

   An artist's heirs often raise objections if a work is put to a use they haven't approved. 
Recently, a dispute erupted over a magazine ad for Porcher toilets, sinks and bidets that includes a reproduction of Matisse's "Large Reclining Nude." 
Artists Rights Society, representing the estate of Matisse, who died in 1954, has complained about the use of the painting to Porcher and its ad agency, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding. 
Officials of the Baltimore Museum of Art, which owns the work, are also quite perturbed. 

   "It was a slur on Matisse," says Nancy Press, the Baltimore museum's coordinator of rights and reproductions. 
"I don't agree with the premise that you can use anything to sell anything. 
We walk a straight line when it comes to the integrity of art." 

   Foote Cone executives say they believed the work was in the public domain and free for the agency to use. 
"Even though it was a toilet, the painting was appropriate because it's a French toilet that's beautifully crafted," says Mr. Tennant, the creative director at Foote Cone. 
"The toilet's wonderful lines, shapes and colors were a natural parallel with Matisse's work." 
Mr. Tennant says the agency is negotiating a settlement with the Matisse estate. 

   Control of paintings in the public domain -- which include impressionist, post-impressionist and most other works that advertisers want to reproduce -- generally falls to the museums that hold them. 
Although the museums normally don't have any copyright claims to such works, they do control the color transparencies that provide much higher-quality reproduction than would a post card or photograph in an art book. 
Because good reproduction is so important in advertising, agencies typically won't use a certain painting unless they can get the transparencies. 

   Richard Tooke, supervisor of rights and reproductions at New York's Museum of Modern Art, won't release his transparencies to advertisers. 
"We're the keepers of works of art," he explains, "and feel it would be presumptuous of us to decide whether an artist would want his paintings commercialized." 

   Even so, Mr. Tooke concedes, some advertisers reproduce his museum's paintings, whether from post cards, books or other sources. 
For example, he says, a furniture-company ad features "The Sleeping Gypsy," by Rousseau, which hangs in the Museum of Modern Art. 
"But there's really nothing we can do about that legally," he says. 

   For their part, ad agency creative directors believe many museums are overly protective of their works. 
Advertisers contend that they are serving an educational purpose by exposing more people to fine art through their ads. 

   As for tampering with some paintings for comic effect, they believe that it's harmless and that many of the artists probably would have been amused, even flattered. 
Indeed, some famous artists dabbled in commercial work themselves. 
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec designed posters for cabarets in Paris and for makers of furniture, printing ink and bicycle chains. 
More recently, Andy Warhol created an ad for Absolut vodka. 

   "I don't believe classic images in art are sacred," says Laurie Solomon, associate creative director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the ad agency that stuck Hershey bars in famous paintings. 
"Paintings are part of the culture and are meant to be enjoyed." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
