ID: 117	RANK: 92	SCORE: 5.519780
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870818-0104 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Perelman's Revenge
---
By Richard Locke</HL>
<DD> 08/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Humor is often the socially acceptable discharge of antisocial emotions -- rage, lust, greed, the violent impulses that seize our animal hearts or arise from our perception of the gap that exists between absolute truth or justice and its social approximations. 
Satire and parody always depend on the reader's awareness of some implicit order that the butt of the joke has violated. 
Writing well is the best revenge. 
Look at the work of S.J. Perelman. 
Here are some 330 letters written by America's foremost humorist between 1928, when he was 24, and 1979, when he died. 
The recipients include T.S. Eliot, Groucho Marx, Raymond Chandler, Ogden Nash, E.B. White, James Thurber, Edmund Wilson and Paul Theroux. 
In "Don't Tread on Me" (Viking, 372 pages, $19.95), edited by Prudence Crowther, we see Mr. Perelman grinding out scripts for grandiose blowhards in Hollywood and suffering the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune in and around Greenwich Village and Gramercy Park from the '30s to the late '70s, with rustic intervals on a farm in Bucks County, Pa., and an "annual four or five weeks of exposure to sunburn" on gossipy Martha's Vineyard. 

   We join him on six trips around the world (he hated India, adored Bali and Hong Kong) and note his prize possessions: a black-and-red 1949 MG sportscar and "an Indo-Chinese grackle (mistakenly called a mynah) whom I bought from a Chinese firecracker shop" in Bangkok. 
We gather he dresses like an Anglo-American gent (though born in Brooklyn of Russian Jewish immigrants whom he almost never mentions), but his Anglophilia has its limits: After 1 1/2 years in London following his wife's death in 1970, he discovers he can't stand the mumbled self-satisfaction and verbal torpor of the "unexpectant" English; he needs the brash American bump and grind. 

   From these letters it's clear that Mr. Perelman was a demon for work. 
For more than 50 years -- despite bouts of depression that could stop the flow for months at a time ("my brain has felt like a tureen of cold pork fat, and everything I've touched has instantly turned to dreck") -- he earned most of his living as a free-lance writer, sending articles to such motley rags as College Humor, Judge, Holiday, Travel &amp; Leisure, and, of course, The New Yorker. 
By the time he died he'd turned out 21 books -- from "Dawn Ginsbergh's Revenge" in 1929 to "Eastward Ha!" in 1977 -- plus eight plays, 11 screenplays and five television scripts. 

   His books were highly praised but never broke the bank, so Hollywood "bricolage" was one way to make money. 
He was famous for his work with the Marx Brothers ("Monkey Business" in 1931 and "Horse Feathers" in 1932), and he did hit it big in 1956 with "Around the World in Eighty Days" for the "megalomaniac" Mike Todd, "an ulcer no larger than a man's hand." 
He also kept trying for a Broadway hit. 
He made it once with "One Touch of Venus" (with Ogden Nash and Kurt Weill) in 1943, but couldn't repeat it. 

   His letters are filled with references to deadlines and the need for cash ("there are going to be an awful lot of bailiffs nipping at my heels unless I can rustle up some of the long green"). 
He seems to have been a shy, angry, manic-depressive with impeccable clothes and an often disconcertingly glacial facade. 

   Unlike the neurotic schlemiels and screamers that are now in comic fashion, Mr. Perelman always keeps his distance. 
His speedy, fiendishly complex sentences coruscate with allusions, slang and erudite wordplay. 
His style suggests his belief in a moral order embedded in the intricacies and deep structures of the English language. 
His satire assumes a sharp awareness of (undemocratic) class divisions and a sensitivity to baroque mixtures of high and low diction and culture. 

   Such a keen sense of hierarchy is hard to come by in these days of rabid pop culture and post-modernist kitschery. 
Today's humorists can't assume the cultural literacy (as it's fashionably called) that Mr. Perelman takes for granted. 
Unlike them, he stays away from politics and violence. 
A virtuoso of the double entendre, he loathes careless obscenity. 
He never plays the common man, the average Joe, one of the working stiffs. 
He usually apes and mocks the style of the American aristocracy of '20s and '30s -- a mix of Edmund Wilson, Fred Astaire and (always) Groucho. 
His voice is dated -- or classic. 

   His letters are charming, flirtatious, buffed to a high sheen and essentially impersonal. 
We don't learn of his unhappy marriage, trouble with his two children, "periodic" psychiatry. 
Those seeking reports of Mr. Perelman's interior should consult Dorothy Herrmann's "S.J. 
Perelman: A Life" (Fireside, 338 pages, $8.95), just out in paperback. 

   'Nuff said, as he might expostulate. 
There are other reasons besides voyeurism to read a great writer's letters; there are many windows in the house of art, and these letters are nothing if not artful. 
Consider the description of Malcolm Muggeridge, then editor of Punch, as "a chatterbox all smile and prussic acid, bristling with insincerity." 
This book prompts one to update Wordsworth's poem on Milton: "Perelman! thou shouldst be living at this hour. 
America hath need of thee: she is a fen of stagnant waters." 
Indeed, what better (bonnier?) "mot" could we add to the national seal than S.J. Perelman's dire warning: "Don't take any wooden rhetoric." 

   ---
   Mr. Locke teaches English and comparative literature at Columbia University. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
