ID: 232	RANK: 18	SCORE: 12.736236
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890810-0150 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890810 </DD>
<AN> 890810-0150. </AN>
<HL> Law -- Legal Perspective:
@  U.S. Investigates Prestigious Universities,
@  Colleges for Possible Antitrust Violations
@  ----
@  By Paul M. Barrett and Christopher J. Chipello
@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 08/10/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<GV> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </GV>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Some 20 prestigious colleges and universities may have violated federal antitrust laws by exchanging certain financial information at meetings that are apparently the target of a Justice Department investigation, antitrust experts and former government officials said. 

   The key to whether antitrust violations could be proven would depend on whether federal prosecutors find that the schools agreed to fix tuition increases for specific years or scholarship amounts for specific students, the antitrust experts said. 
The schools' main justification -- that they exchange certain financial information to avoid an unseemly bidding war for top students -- probably wouldn't carry much weight in court if the government decided to bring suit to block the longstanding practice, the antitrust experts agreed. 

   Moreover, several former government officials said, the fact that the Justice Department is investigating how prices are set in a field not usually viewed as commercial may indicate that prosecutors will enforce antitrust laws more vigorously under the Bush administration than they did under President Reagan. 

   A department spokeswoman confirmed that the antitrust division has sent formal requests for information on tuition and financial-aid practices to "about 20" schools over the past six weeks. 
School officials said in interviews that the targets of the investigation apparently include members of an informal group of 23 prestigious colleges and universities -- including Harvard and other Ivy League schools -- that systematically exchange financial information at a meeting every spring. 
The Washington Post first reported the probe yesterday. 

   Justice Department officials declined to provide details of the investigation but said it is at "a very preliminary" stage. 
The department spokeswoman said the requests sent to the schools "mention the Sherman Act," which prohibits any transaction "in restraint of trade or commerce" and provides for penalties including fines and imprisonment. 

   School officials interviewed yesterday uniformly said that they don't discuss tuition levels until after rates for the coming year have been announced by the individual schools. 

   Tuition increases at most colleges and universities in recent years have run substantially above inflation. 
The College Board, a New York educational association, in figures to be released today, said that tuition at private, four-year colleges will rise an average of 9% for the 1989-90 school year. 
The College Board said total annual costs to students at those institutions, including such items as room and board, will rise to about $14,500. 
Annual costs at the most expensive institutions rose to more than $18,000 this past academic year. 

   Members of the group of 23 elite colleges and universities have previously acknowledged that for the past 35 years their representatives have met annually to share information on common applicants seeking financial aid. 
As a result of this process, many students receive financial-aid offers from a number of the participating schools that require identical out-of-pocket expenses to be paid by the applicants or their families. 

   In addition to Harvard, the other 22 schools that meet every spring are: Amherst College; Barnard College; Bowdoin College; Brown University; Bryn Mawr College; Colby College; Columbia University; Cornell University; Dartmouth College; Mount Holyoke College; Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Middlebury College; the University of Pennsylvania; Princeton University; Smith College; Trinity College; Tufts University; Vassar College; Wellesley College; Wesleyan University; Williams College; and Yale University. 

   Of that group, Amherst, Bowdoin, Colby, Harvard and Tufts have received investigative letters from the Justice Department, officials at the schools said. 
Officials at Wellesley, MIT, Princeton and Yale said they hadn't received the requests for information as of yesterday. 
At least one school not in the group, the University of Chicago, has also received a Justice Department request, suggesting that the inquiry may go beyond the spring meeting of the 23 schools. 

   The schools have contended that sharing financial information is proper because federal statutes establish a basic formula for determining applicants' financial need for scholarships. 
The schools have said they discuss why, using the same formula, they frequently come up with different assessments of what a family can afford. 
The goal, according to university officials, is to make sure that scholarships are based only on need and to prevent schools from bidding against each other for talented applicants. 

   "The intent is to . . . take the financial-aid decision out of the running as a factor," when students choose a college, a Bowdoin spokesman said. 

   In its requests, the Justice Department asked schools for a broad array of information on tuition, financial aid and faculty salaries, from 1985 to now, school officials said. 
Officials at Amherst, Harvard and Tufts all said they believe their practices are in compliance with the law. 

   Antitrust experts said the mere exchange of price or scholarship information among schools wouldn't necessarily be illegal. 
But if the exchange were accompanied by evidence that the schools had agreed to offer uniform financial-aid packages to particular students or to fix tuition increases, "that would be a traditional antitrust violation," said Irving Scher, a New York lawyer who heads the American Bar Association's antitrust section. 

   Although they aren't normally viewed as the sort of businesses regulated by antitrust laws, colleges and universities "are to some extent selling a product -- education -- with a price -- tuition," said Phillip Areeda, an antitrust professor at Harvard Law School. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
