ID: 232	RANK: 44	SCORE: 10.038757
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870519-0064 </DOCNO>
<HL> What's New:
How to Tell When
Your Skin Is Done
---
By Michael Waldholz, David Stipp and Frank E. James</HL>
<DD> 05/19/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> XYYX DD
FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN>
<TEXT>
   A "sunburn meter" may soon tell beachgoers they've been in the sun too long. 

   Xytronyx Inc., a San Diego-based maker of health products, has developed a set of chemicals that change color with increasing exposure to ultraviolet rays, the invisible portion of the sun's rays that cause tanning and burning. 
The company plans to use the chemicals in a Band-Aidlike patch that can be put on the skin of sunbathers, or a badge that can be attached to a swimsuit. 
The wearer can tell by the patch's color how much ultraviolet he's been exposed to, even on overcast days. 
A sunbather using a sunscreen lotion can dab the lotion on the patch to see how well the lotion is blocking the burning rays. 

   "It works much like a dosimeter used by workers in the nuclear-power industry to measure their exposure to radiation," says Peter Baram, Xytronyx president. 
The company acknowledges that other firms have developed other types of ultraviolet gauges, but claims its device is the first with commercial potential because it's cheaper and simpler than the others. 
Xytronyx is negotiating marketing rights with several companies and expects to see disposable versions of the gauge on the market this summer, Mr. Baram says. 

   Excessive exposure to sunlight is a major cause of skin cancer. 
Recent studies also indicate that severe sunburn at an early age sharply increases the risk of developing skin cancer later in life. 

   Protecting Animals
   Self-mutilating animals may be aided by a drug used to treat heroin addiction. 

   Researchers at Tufts University's veterinary school in Grafton, Mass., are giving naltrexone, a human drug sold by DuPont Co., to animals that habitually injure themselves. 
In humans, naltrexone counteracts opium-like drugs, such as heroin, and eliminates the "high" people get from such drugs. 
It also blocks effects of naturally occurring substances that are chemically similar to heroin. 
Such substances, including endorphins, are thought to lessen pain and cause the "runner's high" that long-distance runners experience. 

   The Tufts researchers reason that some animals get a slight "high" from endorphins released when they injure themselves, which reinforces the habit of self-mutilation. 
Some stall-kept horses develop a vice called "cribbing," a tendency to bite objects and swallow air, which can produce fatal intestinal blockage. 
Some dogs habitually chase and chew their tails. 

   Experiments with naltrexone so far support the theory. 
"I can inject a dose that will temporarily stop horses from cribbing virtually 100% of time," says Nicholas Dodman, one of the researchers. 
Implanted naltrexone pellets, instead of injections, might work for days or weeks, he suggests. 
Amy Marder, another researcher, is working with dogs. 
"One German shepherd that constantly sucked on a stove handle became much better with naltrexone," she says. 
Such bizarre behavior is often intensified with confinement, so exercise should accompany naltrexone treatment, she adds. 

   Increasing Fertility
   A sperm treatment appears to boost the effectiveness of artificial insemination. 

   One cause of male infertility is low sperm motility, an inability of the sperm to propel themselves with the velocity needed for fertilization. 
"Sperm that 'swim' less than 20 microns a second are very unlikely to fertilize a human egg," says Robert K. Burke, a reproductive endocrinologist with the Fertility Institute of Western Massachusetts. 

   Dr. Burke and his colleagues have developed a new test for sperm motility using a special computer program and time-lapse photography. 
The test, which involves equipment costing $15,000 to $20,000, is "more quantitative, much more highly reproducible and far less expensive" than existing motility tests, he says. 
He predicts the test will eventually become a routine part of all semen analyses. 

   The test also has helped the researchers confirm that a simple test-tube treatment of the sperm can enhance their motility. 
The sperm are incubated in a special high-protein mixture for about 20 minutes. 
For 75% of males, Dr. Burke says, the treatment increases the sperm's velocity to well above normal. 

   The treatment may help many previously infertile couples. 
In cases where the treatment increases sperm motility, a wife can be artificially inseminated with her husband's sperm instead of having to resort to sperm from a donor bank. 
So far, the treatment has been successful in about 35% of the previously infertile couples in which it was tried, Dr. Burke says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
