ID: 232	RANK: 55	SCORE: 9.607428
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880718-0072 </DOCNO>
<HL> LAB NOTES </HL>
<AUTHOR> David Stipp </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> CBCX </CO>
<IN> PHA CHM </IN>
<TEXT>
      An Early Warning Test
   For Bladder Cancer
   USING A NEW urinalysis test, physicians may be able to detect bladder cancer earlier than ever before. 

   The first visible sign of the disease, which is expected to strike 46,000 Americans this year, often is blood in the urine. 
But by the time that's noticed, the cancer usually is advancing. 
For the medical community, this is especially frustrating because significant progress has been made in treating the disease when it is detected early enough. 

   The new test -- called quantitative fluorescence image analysis, or QFIA -- is based on the fact that cancer cells contain abnormally large amounts of DNA. 
In people with bladder cancer, such cells are expelled during every urination and sometimes can be detected with QFIA before blood starts showing up. 
The test employs a fluorescent dye that sticks to DNA in the cells. 
An automated microscope is used for fast detection of the cancer cells, whose excess DNA aborbs more dye than other cells, making them appear brighter than the others. 

   Gary Smith, a Houston urologist, says QFIA is particularly useful for large-scale testing of those patients most likely to develop the disease, primarily heavy smokers and those in whom the disease is in remission. 

   In theory, QFIA should also be able to detect other kinds of cancer, says Arthur P. Haag, president of Houston-based CytoDiagnostics Inc., which is marketing the test. 
The company is now investigating ways of using the test to detect cancers of the colon, lung and esophagus, among others. 

   Advances in Packaging
   May Thwart Tampering
   NEW PACKAGING for consumer goods vividly shows if the products inside have been tampered with. 

   Researchers at Arthur D. Little Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., consulting firm, have come up with a number of methods to make it possible. 
In one, the packaging changes colors when punctured. 
This would reveal the kind of tampering such as occurred at several stores in Los Angeles earlier this month, when orange juice cartons were pierced with syringes. 

   Another new method is designed to reveal tampering with lids. 
To do this, a hair-sized bundle of fiber optic strands is run from the top of the lid to the side and is attached along the way to the container itself. 
As long as that connection remains intact, a bright dot of light will show up where the strands meet the lid's side. 
But break the connection by moving the lid, and the light disappears. 

   Getting the Jump
   On Lyme Disease
   LYME DISEASE is hard to diagnose, but a new test should ease the task considerably. 

   The disease, which can be fatal, is caused by bacteria transmitted by the bite of the deer tick. 
Only about 1,500 cases are reported each year, mainly in the Northeast and in Wisconsin, Minnesota and California. 
But Allen C. Steere, a Tufts University professor and the researcher who first identified the disease, says that incidence rates may be much greater. 

   That's because the effects of the disease -- which include arthritis, heart disorders and neurological damage -- are easily confused with the signs of other, more common illnesses, such as multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease. 
Furthermore, the symptoms usually don't manifest themselves until weeks or months after the tick bite, making it difficult for doctors to connect them with, say, a camping trip. 

   Unlike earlier tests for Lyme disease, the new one promises to be quick and reliable. 
Developed by researchers at Tufts and at Cambridge BioScience Corp., Worcester, Mass., it uses purified components of the bacteria that cause the disease. 
When these components, known as antigens, are added to infected blood, they stick to antibodies in the blood, causing an easily detectable reaction. 

   A Cambridge BioScience spokesman says the company hopes to begin marketing the test by next spring. 

   Killing Pesky Insects
   With a Lot of Hot Air
   HOT AIR -- lots of it -- may be the best way of all to kill insect pests. 

   A new extermination technique calls for pumping air heated by propane burners into insect-infested houses that have been covered with tarps to keep the heat from escaping. 
Once the temperature inside the house reaches 120 degrees Fahrenheit, most insects -- including termites, cockroaches and fleas -- will drop dead, says Walter Ebeling, entomology professor emeritus at the University of California at Los Angeles, who developed the technique with research partner Charles F. Forbes. 

   In tests, says Mr. Ebeling, the procedure has worked where even fumigation failed. 

   Indeed, the method offers several potential advantages over regular fumigation techniques. 
For one thing, residents aren't exposed to poisons. 
They can also move back into their homes right after the treatment. 
And, unlike fumigation, the heat technique can easily be used to treat only one room of a building. 

   What's more, insects aren't likely to develop a resistance to heat, as they can to pesticides. 
"It would be like (a fly) becoming resistant to the fly swatter," says Mr. Ebeling. 

   But will a person's possessions melt at 120 degrees? 
Mr. Ebeling says that plastic shampoo bottles and candles might; he suggests removing them before beginning the heat treatment. 

   The researchers developed the heat-trap idea after earlier attempts to freeze bugs with liquid nitrogen proved impractical. 
They plan to have it on the market within a few months. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
