ID: 232	RANK: 56	SCORE: 9.587433
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870312-0107 </DOCNO>
<HL> New Intelligence Tests Emphasize
Abilities Overlooked by IQ Exams
---
By David Stipp
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Okay, you have a high IQ. 
But do you also have insight? 

   Try this question: If you have black socks and brown socks in your drawer, mixed in a 4-to-5 ratio, how many socks must you take out to ensure getting a pair the same color? 

   To answer, you need the ability to grasp what's important and to ignore irrelevant details. 
Those with lots of that ability -- which psychologists call insight -- quickly realize that the ratio of socks is unimportant and arrive at the answer: three. (If the first is black and the second is brown, the third must be one or the other.) 

   IQ and insight are related, but those with high IQs don't always have lots of insight. 
Indeed, it doesn't take a high IQ to realize that IQ tests ignore many important mental abilities. 
Psychologists, increasingly mindful of this, are developing new ways to assess aspects of intelligence that IQ tests miss. 

   Better aptitude tests and broader views of intelligence seem long overdue to many experts on the subject. 
Despite their limitations, IQ and closely related aptitude tests -- which essentially measure the same abilities -- are widely used to assist placement in gifted and special-education programs, college admissions and hiring. 

   "We've gotten so hung up on IQ that we have forgotten it isn't very predictive of life success," says Robert Sternberg, a Yale University psychologist. 
Howard Gardner, a Harvard University psychologist, adds: "IQ is enormously influential in formation of self-image. 
It seems that as many people remember their Scholastic Aptitude Test scores as remember their Social Security numbers." 

   Messrs. 
Sternberg and Gardner are among the leaders of a recently renewed movement to topple the IQ hegemony. 
Mr. Sternberg has developed a theory of intelligence based on studies of what succeeds in the real world, such as "street smarts." 
Mr. Gardner argues that there are several kinds of intelligence, including the mental gifts of skilled mimes, social workers and others whose talents are ignored by conventional aptitude tests. 

   Those tests aren't likely to disappear quickly. 
In fact, thinkers such as Messrs. 
Sternberg and Gardner don't want to do away with the tests, which they concede give a rough measure of the kind of mental ability needed to do well in school. 
Instead, they want to supplement them with tests that assess other kinds of intelligence. 

   The IQ-testing establishment hasn't dismissed the idea. 
Major testing firms, including Psychological Corp. and Educational Testing Service, are helping to fund research on novel tests Messrs. 
Sternberg and Gardner have proposed. 
Many educators, meanwhile, say they would welcome broader measures of intelligence, especially in light of a recent court ruling. 

   A suit filed in 1971 on behalf of a student known as Larry P. charged, like several others, that IQ tests used for special-education placement were culturally biased. 
The suit ended last fall when a federal district court in California outlawed the use of IQ tests for placing black children in the state's special-education programs. 

   "The Larry P. decision is a critical watershed," asserts Jane Mercer, a sociology professor at the University of California at Riverside. 
"For 75 years, we've had an IQ paradigm for classifying children. 
Now I see that whole paradigm shifting." 

   For instance, San Antonio, Texas-based Psychological Corp., which produces the Wechsler IQ test, is developing new tests with Yale's Mr. Sternberg. 
As a child, Mr. Sternberg recalls, he tended to freeze up and do poorly on IQ tests; now his research stresses the importance of practical ability. 
Among other things, he is interested in what it takes to cope well with novel situations, such as the insight involved in answering the sock question. 

   To learn more about practical intelligence, Mr. Sternberg and colleagues surveyed business executives and psychology professors to find out what they think it involves. 
The results indicated that high IQ is less important than a knack for mastering what Mr. Sternberg calls "tacit knowledge" -- the practical tricks of a trade that teachers rarely mention. 
One such trick for an assistant professor seeking tenure, says Mr. Sternberg, is to try to maximize your visibility by publishing papers in journals with large circulations. 

   Mr. Sternberg has devised questions to assess this knack. 
Example: You are a mid-level manager seeking promotion. 
Rate the following as ways to achieve your goal: (A) give a lot of weight in decision making to a boss's preferences; (B) participate in local TV panel discussions; (C) alert your boss to your important accomplishments; and so on, through 11 other choices. 
Such questions have no single right answers. 
But experienced, successful people tend to rate option A more highly than B and C, Mr. Sternberg says. 

   Harvard's Mr. Gardner also is developing novel tests based on his idea that there are more than a dozen kinds of intelligence. 
That idea isn't new. 
But he has added cogent new twists to it, such as the view that abilities lost when part of the brain is damaged by stroke or other injury give important clues to the different kinds of intelligence. 
Moreover, he believes that some kinds of intelligence just can't be measured with paper-and-pencil tests. 

   At Tufts University in Medford, Mass., researchers working with Mr. Gardner are seeking ways to assess, among other things, children's abilities to express themselves through movement. 
In a session with visiting 4-year-olds, one researcher asks the kids to act like clocks. 
Afterward, the researchers marvel about one girl -- gifted with what they call "kinesthetic intelligence" -- who instantly stuck out her arms like hands on a clock, and swung a leg back and forth like a pendulum. 

   The researchers also are studying social perceptiveness. 
They have invented a game-like test for children based on a desktop-sized replica of an experimental preschool classroom at Tufts. 
After attending the preschool for a few weeks, kids are asked to place small wooden models of their classmates -- identified by pasted-on photographs -- in the classroom replica in ways that show their peers' friendships and activity preferences. 

   "We've found that some children are completely oblivious" to interpersonal matters, says David Feldman, co-director of the Tufts project. 
"And some know exactly who spends time with whom, and where everybody likes to play." 

   The project is aimed at developing guidelines that can be widely used for assessing children's strengths and weaknesses in 15 to 25 kinds of intelligence. (The exact number hasn't been settled yet.) 
Assessments would be reported to parents with both numerical test scores and teachers' written comments. 

   Mr. Feldman acknowledges that such assessments would be more difficult to administer than conventional aptitude tests. 
"But I think it can be done," he says. 
"Several testing companies and school districts have asked to work with us. 
It seems there's a great willingness across the country to accept our ideas." 

   Educational Testing Service, a nonprofit testing company in Princeton, N.J., already is working with Mr. Gardner in a Pittsburgh public-school project to develop new ways to assess high school students' gifts in music, art and creative writing. 
One goal is to define ways to judge the progress made between preliminary and final versions of a student's work, instead of simply grading finished products. 

   Ultimately, all this research is aimed at helping to improve education. 
Tests based on Mr. Sternberg's work, for example, might encourage teachers to put more emphasis on often-neglected talents and knowledge needed in real life. 
And Mr. Gardner's work promises to give more recognition, for example, to students who may be only moderately gifted at conventional academic pursuits, but who may be very talented at nurturing or leading others. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
