ID: 232	RANK: 66	SCORE: 9.220086
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870713-0114 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor:
Conducting Science Mercifully</HL>
<DD> 07/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Science and its progress never have been attacked by me or my associates ("Science Under Attack," editorial, June 16). 
The issue is the responsible, decent, honest and effective conduct of science. 
The organizations in which I have served as a full-time volunteer for the past 30-odd years, the Animal Welfare Institute and the Society for Animal Protective Legislation, are anti-cruelty, not anti-vivisection groups. 
My duties as an officer in both organizations have required my presence at official meetings and hearings where Dr. Michael DeBakey also was present. 
But on no occasion have I ever entered into a personal conversation with him regarding the medical treatment of any member of my family, much less come "up to him to say how much his medical breakthroughs had meant to {my} husband," as your editorial falsely states. 

   It is absurd to suggest, as this self-serving fantasy goes on to claim, that I could be "flustered" by news about animal experimentation. 
As the daughter of a physiologist who used experimental animals, and as a co-founder with him and other scientists of the Animal Welfare Institute, I have spent 35 years in the study of needless animal suffering in laboratories and ways to prevent or alleviate it. 

   I hope further commentary on laboratory animals by the Journal will follow normal procedures for checking for accuracy. 
My name is Christine, not Helen. 

   Christine Stevens
   President
   Animal Welfare Institute
   Washington
   ---
   No one is suggesting, through my legislation, that critical laboratory research into the medical mysteries of our time should stop. 
H.R. 778 would prevent the use only of those animals that are taken from shelters. 
The availability of most random-source animals, including those procured through newspaper advertisements and those obtained from, for example, litters of dogs or cats that have bred repeatedly on farms, would not be affected. 

   The other major category of laboratory animals is purpose-bred animals. 
As the name implies, these are raised in colonies solely for use in biomedical research. 
The argument that using only purpose-bred and non-shelter, random-source animals in research would drive up the cost of this research prohibitively is a simple fallacy, as Dr. DeBakey should know. 
Again, most random-source animals still could be used in labs. 

   Laboratory research must go on, but it is important that we reach a middle ground on this matter. 
Once the biomedical-research community accepts the fact that shelter animals do not belong in research labs, we will take a step toward forging a compromise between those who would not alter animal-research policy at all and those who would end research on animals altogether. 

   Robert J. Mrazek (D., N.Y.)
   U.S. House of Representatives
   Washington
   ---
   Your editorial contains an inaccurate and misleading anecdote attributed to Dr. DeBakey. 
Christine Stevens is not an animal-rights advocate. 
However, she certainly has been one of the most influential and effective campaigners on behalf of improved welfare for animals. 
She never has denied the need to use animals in research and it is, therefore, extremely unlikely that she would be flustered that her husband's surgery should have been based on knowledge acquired from animal studies. 

   Your anecdote raises further concerns. 
Dr. DeBakey and Mrs. Stevens are currently both on a National Academy of Sciences panel that is close to completing a report on the animal-research issue. 
It is surprising that Dr. DeBakey should have related an anecdote that calls into question Mrs. Stevens's consistency and logic. 
In doing this, Dr. DeBakey is not acting as a colleague, and I also imagine that he is not acting in accord with the normal standards of behavior expected of NAS panel members. 

   Finally, animal research is a difficult and contentious issue. 
Society, via its democratic institutions, is struggling to balance the human need for greater biological understanding with the human responsibility to protect research animals from unnecessary suffering and death. 
Pressure for the reevaluation of current practices is not only coming from a fringe group of animal-loving "misanthropes," but also from an increasing number of scientists who are questioning some of the things that are done to animals. 
This is a healthy trend since it will reduce animal use and suffering, and lead to better science. 

   Andrew Rowan
   Director, Tufts Center for Animals 

   Tufts University
   North Grafton, Mass.
   ---
   Any humane society or city pound that releases pets to laboratories violates the public trust inherent in the term "animal shelter." 
Research has shown that many individuals choose to abandon unwanted dogs and cats rather than bring them to a "shelter" that sells pets to biomedical researchers. 
For example, since the City of Los Angeles repealed an ordinance in 1981 requiring shelters to send animals to research laboratories, the number of animals brought to city shelters each year has steadily increased. 
No such increases occurred in the decade prior to 1981. 

   John F. Kullberg
   President
   American Society for the
   Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 

   New York
   ---
   As proponents of animal rights, my wife and I have contacted local governments, written newsletters, advertised in local newspapers, organized and attended public meetings, circulated petitions, successfully fostered a local animal-control ordinance, distributed literature, and solicited and contributed money. 
We, and the many who have worked with us, don't fit the reactionary picture you paint. 
Instead, the vast majority of those who support humane treatment of animals understand that careful and humane use of them in research is important to science. 

   Leslie R. Inglis
   Cincinnati
   ---
   I have a mother in the terminal stages of cancer who has gained several years of life from recent advances in medical research. 
I work for a biotechnology company responsible for some of these advances. 
I have a dog, somewhat sickly, who also has benefited from research on other, perhaps less loved, dogs. 
Yet I have profound doubts -- as I daily walk through our laboratories and observe the death and well-meant torture of a variety of creatures -- that this research is at all a proper thing to do. 
I think it no more moral that an animal die in a pound than in a laboratory, but I cannot avoid knowing the sufferings that precede death in the lab. 

   Geraldine Kemske
   Melrose, Mass.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
