ID: 232	RANK: 8	SCORE: 15.563972
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880407-0052 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Freedom of Speech on Campus </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Your March 14 editorial "Dartmouth's Vexations" hit home. 
In late January, we hosted representatives from the Sandinista government and the Nicaraguan resistance on back-to-back nights (the Sandinistas refused to share the podium with any representative of the Contras). 
While the Sandinista, Julio Icaza (then-deputy permanent representative to the U.N.), was able to deliver his speech without incident, the following night the Contra, Alfredo Cesar, was nearly silenced by what has been called the "rent-a-mob" forces in Cambridge. 

   While we were able, after removing 26 protesters, to hear Mr. Cesar, the fracas certainly had a chilling effect on future efforts to bring people of controversy and note from the right/conservative viewpoint to the forum. 
Although we were successful with Mr. Cesar, the prospect of once again encountering the expense, criticism and scrutiny is a frustrating one, and it may be at a price many are increasingly unwilling to pay. 

   I for one hope that will not happen because our role as educator will have then become moot. 

   Jennifer Jordan
   Forum Coordinator
   Institute of Politics
   Harvard University
   Cambridge, Mass.
   ---
   Your editorial lists Tufts University as an institution where the politics of Alexander Haig would not be tolerated. 

   Four years ago we invited several former secretaries of state to Tufts to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy. 
We have an excellent policy on controversial speakers, and the university is very experienced in dealing with noisy situations. 
We guaranteed our participants that we would handle all groups with discipline and security. 
I cannot speak for Mr. Haig, but at the last moment Henry Kissinger pulled out. 
I assume that Mr. Haig also withdrew at the last moment, because he did not appear at the forum. 

   In recent years we have had the Jewish Defense League, the PLO, Israeli settlers and the acting president of Ber Zeit University on our campus. 
This past semester the university sponsored a discussion by the director of academic affairs of the CIA, who wrote that he was very gratified at the reception he got. 
Within the past month, at a symposium on "Covert Action and American Democracy," we had the pleasure of one former CIA Director and several station chiefs sitting on a panel with people of the opposite political orientation. 
Comandante Zero was also a guest at Tufts. 

   Ms. Kirkpatrick and Messrs. 
Haig, Pastora, Kahane, Chomsky, et al. are welcome at Tufts. 
We look to educate and stimulate our students, and this requires an open campus. 
No one has ever been denied the First Amendment here. 

   Sol Gittleman
   Provost, Tufts University
   Medford, Mass.
   ---
   Of all the leading liberal-arts institutions in America, Dartmouth College has been a leader in recent years in permitting and even nurturing the growth of conservative thinking, writing and activism among its students and faculty. 
True to its long history, Dartmouth proudly sustains open and free speech and the attendant controversies that have arisen on campus. 
Contrary to your editorials, Dartmouth certainly has not engaged in censorship, suppression of free speech or persecution by closed hearing. 

   In the case at hand, Dartmouth was dealing with unruly students who were completely out of line. 
Your suspicion of other motivation is wholly unsupported by any evidence. 
Dartmouth's actions would be and absolutely should be the same regardless of the political or other persuasions of the individuals involved. 

   Robert G. Tunnell
   Lafayette, Calif.
   ---
   After checking with people I know in Hanover, N.H., I find your editorial to be almost entirely based on the facts. 
As with many liberal-arts institutions, the truth is more likely to be found in independent sources that are not in the employ of the management. 
My alma mater doesn't need a better public-relations agent; it needs an infusion of fair-minded trustees and higher standards for faculty. 

   Donald Lambert Folkers
   Portland, Maine
   ---
   The Journal is to be congratulated on highlighting the intolerance against conservatives on campus. 
It would be bad enough if the Dartmouth Review, Jeane Kirkpatrick, Adolfo Calero, et al. were the only targets of this prejudice. 
It is compounded when discriminations against conservative institutions are included. 

   The faculty at Colby College has voted to ban students from meeting with CIA recruiters. 
Similar faculty-sponsored efforts are under way in California, Illinois, Massachusetts, Minnesota and New York. 

   A similar campaign is under way to prevent colleges from offering students the option of participating in the ROTC and its related scholarship programs. 

   Conservative and religious student group applications for recognition are frequently denied or delayed indefinitely despite or because of a plethora of leftist groups on campus. 
It is sometimes hard to concede rights to those with whom you are ideologically opposed. 
Our colleges are finding it impossible. 

   The First Amendment seeks to protect freedom of speech, religion and assembly. 
Our colleges and universities purport to teach their students its nearly 200-year history. 
Maybe the day will yet come when our colleges also implement its spirit. 

   Ron Robinson
   President
   Young America's Foundation
   Reston, Va.
   ---
   Regarding the problems at Dartmouth College: All astute and wealthy Dartmouth students should transfer to Yale. 

   Franklin H. Macgregor
   Woodstock, Conn.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
