ID: 101	RANK: 15	SCORE: 9.340298
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871111-0116 </DOCNO>
<HL> What Is Our Man
Doing on Golf Course
At 4 in the Morning?
---
He Is Angling to Hook Up
With Some Dew Worms,
But They Turn on Him
---
By Gary Lamphier
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> ARVA, Ontario  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It is 4 a.m. on the front nine at Sunningdale Country Club with not a golfer in sight. 

   A can of worms is strapped to my right ankle, a can of sawdust to my left. 
A miner's lamp glows on my forehead as I hunt for my quarry: "Lumbricus terrestris," the Canadian dew worm, the American night crawler. 

   He is everywhere -- poking out of his burrow, lolling on the stubby grass, playing chicken with his predators, of which I am one. 

   I step gingerly, dip dewy fingers into sawdust for a better grip on the slimy creatures, crouch low and pinch. 
Fffft. 
A worm zips through my fingers and underground, leaving a sticky mucus as his calling card. 
"You don't know how to pick," scolds Ola Przyszlak, a sturdy woman who does. 
She will round up 3,000 worms tonight while I snag fewer than 50, not counting ones I accidentally tear in two. 

   Several thousand pickers like Mrs. Przyszlak hunt for worms starting in April and continuing until about now on golf courses and pastures in southern Ontario. 
They catch about half the 2.5 billion worms that American anglers buy each year, says Alan Tomlin, the Canadian government's lone worm researcher. 
As a Canadian crop, dew worms aren't in a class with wheat, say, but they are "larger than Canada's onion business, almost as big as tomatoes," he says. 

   Though worms help to aerate and mix the soil, they are generally reviled by all except the Maoris of New Zealand, who consider certain varieties delicacies, and anglers, who revere them as bait for freshwater fish from bass to catfish. 
Worms hereabouts swarm to the surface on mild, damp nights, to soak up oxygen through their slimy skins. 
When conditions are just right, as after a rain, a top picker can grab 20,000 and earn about $380. 
But tonight is too hot and dry. 
Our dozen-member crew collects only 10,000 worms. 
My three wriggling handfuls bring about 95 cents. 

   Picking worms is nauseating, backbreaking toil. 
"At least you didn't get sick," Mrs. Przyszlak tells me, recalling one first-time picker who did. 
The work is done mainly by Vietnamese and other new immigrants. 
As with the Hungarians who many say started Canada's worm trade in the 1950s or the Greeks and South Koreans who followed, the dew worm is their slippery ticket to a better life. 

   "No worms in Poland. 
No business," says Bohdan Ciekanski, a bearded former tool-and-die maker who has been in Canada just three weeks and is learning grassroots capitalism. 
"We are miners," he jokes, tapping his headlamp. 

   This can be underground work in other ways. 
The Canadian worm industry has no association, no regulators, no statistics and a wary view of outsiders. 
"A lot of these people don't pay taxes and don't want to advertise it," says Joseph Hubert, a worm wholesaler who stores his livestock in a warehouse under a Toronto expressway. 

   One of the few places worm traders surface is the Cafe Santan, a spartan coffee bar sandwiched between a real-estate office and women's clothing shop in Toronto's Greek neighborhood. 
Cafe Santan is the Comex of the worm world. 

   One morning, the surrounding streets are lined with dozens of boxy Dodge Maxivans, the trucks preferred for ferrying crews and worms to and from picking sites, sometimes 150 miles away. 
"After a good night, there might be 15 million worms on the street," says Carole Lynch, who runs a London, Ontario, wholesale business with her husband, Larry Hurlbut. 

   Almost 100 worm brokers and wholesalers crowd the coffee shop and the sidewalk outside, for one-on-one bargaining over the cargo in the trucks. 
Some shout and wave their arms, some whisper urgently. 
The same worms may change hands several times in a morning, and the wholesale price may move as much as 20% in a day. 
This season's price paid to wholesalers typically was $35 or more for a thousand worms (in terms of the U.S. dollar), representing a markup almost 100% from the price paid to pickers. 
By the time the worms reach fishermen in the U.S., the price typically exceeds $1 a dozen, or $83 a thousand. 

   Brokers buy and sell worms in a hurry because they don't have a place to store them. 
Wholesalers operate refrigerated warehouses where they store styrofoam cartons of dirt and hibernating worms. 

   The worms snuggle in their cartons as long as they think the sun is shining. 
But a stampede can start if someone accidentally turns off the warehouse lights. 
When that happened in Mr. Hurlbut's warehouse, he says, he found 50,000 worms all over the floor and three or four feet up the walls. 

   For wholesalers with fixed costs, price fluctuations can be murder. 
George Alifagonis says his wholesale business went belly up in 1982 when he bought high-priced worms he couldn't sell. 

   Pickers face risks, too. 
Bulls in the pasture, for instance. 
"They chase our people. 
The animals are so big and our people are so small," says the Vietnamese foreman of my worm-picking crew. 

   More worrisome are worm thieves and poachers who gate-crash on pastures or golf courses leased to legitimate operators. 
Mr. Hurlbut says he pays about $2,275 to lease a course like Sunningdale from dusk to dawn for a season. 
When poachers show up, fights can erupt. 
"That's a good part of the reason I have Goliath," says Mr. Hurlbut, patting his German shepherd. 

   Police in Chatham, Ontario, say marauders broke through the concrete wall of a warehouse there this summer and stole 200,000 worms. 

   Worms are picked commercially in the U.S., mostly in North Carolina, Ohio and Idaho. 
Some U.S. producers even use electric rods that somehow coax worms to come up. 
But, says Wayne King, a wholesaler in Canton, N.C., "there's more worms go into Toronto after a good night's picking than all the worms produced in North Carolina in a whole year." 

   Why is this corner of Canada so blessed with worms? 
Mr. Tomlin, the government researcher, believes Canada's thick winter snow cover protects dew worms from predators and helps them live longer, multiply faster, and grow bigger than other worms. 
Because dew worms snooze for months in refrigerated coolers at temperatures that would kill other varieties of worms, he says, "Shelf life goes up -- you can ship them great distances." 

   Robert Lytle, a Columbus, Ohio, wholesaler, says hotter, drier summers in the U.S. limit worm picking except in the spring and fall. 
"Our season is short, so we can't attract people" to pick, he says. 
"There's more of a professional worm catcher in Canada." 

   But Mr. Alifagonis, who now works for the bait-wholesaling business of his brother, Chris, says worms are getting harder to find in Canada and they are smaller than they used to be. 
"Something is wrong," he says, tugging his graying beard. 
"It must be the acid rain." 

   He also worries about a deteriorating work ethic. 
"You don't see young people picking worms. 
They want the easy life. 
I don't know what's going to happen with this generation," he frets. 
But after early stints as a cab driver and construction worker, he says, he plans to stay in the business he has been in for 17 years. 
"You know any work that's not hard?" he asks. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
