ID: 101	RANK: 31	SCORE: 7.422095
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871015-0058 </DOCNO>
<HL> Britain Uses a Hard Sell on BP Offering
---
Ubiquitous Ads Urge
Public to Seek Shares
---
By John Marcom Jr.
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP BP
PETROLEUM (PET)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The advertising blitz for the huge British Petroleum Co. share offer doesn't actually promise profit and joy. 
That would be against the rules. 

   But the subliminal hints seem awfully enticing. 
The music is upbeat. 
The faces are smiling. 
The fireworks are inspiring. 
The green and yellow colors of BP's shield logo are everywhere. 

   "You get this fantastic folderol," Frank Watts, an analyst for Sheppards, a London stockbroker, says. 
"It just gets in the subconscious." 

   The folderol goes far beyond what would be acceptable under U.S. regulations. 
It makes BP an easy buy recommendation for London analysts, even though some of them think other major oil companies might make better long-term investments. 

   This morning, a huge banner on the facade of Britannic House, BP's London headquarters, will announce the price that U.K. individual investors will pay in the #7.5 billion ($12.35 billion) BP share offering. 
Trading of the shares, which are being sold by the British government, is scheduled to begin Oct. 30. 

   As the ads say, it is Britain's biggest share offer yet -- and the world's, although that record probably will be broken next month by the second issue of shares in Nippon Telegraph &amp; Telephone Corp., Japan's phone company. 

   The BP offer's biggest attraction is its installment-payment structure. 
But the avalanche of publicity helps its chances of success. 
A British trade publication called Marketing says consumer awareness of BP shares currently is higher than for any other advertised product -- beating out such household names as Guinness, Coca-Cola and Nescafe. 
About six million Britons have requested share applications. 
It looks like another triumph for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's vision of a shareholding democracy. 

   "The advertising is designed to create an atmosphere in which people feel it is the thing to do" to apply for shares, Robert Willott, a partner at the London accounting firm of Spicer &amp; Pegler, says. 

   Such advertising increasingly is in vogue here. 
Royal Life Holdings Ltd. recently promoted a new unit trust, or mutual fund, as the "Royal Event" and ran Britain's first national television advertisements for unit trusts. 
Rivals grumbled, but the company drew 35% more applicants than expected and raised #250 million. 

   Last year, Thames Television PLC used ads on its London TV station to promote its share offering. 

   "We got an overwhelming public response," Robert Dutton, a director of County NatWest Ltd., the broadcaster's financial adviser, says. 

   Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium that is planning a tunnel under the English Channel, hired Dewe Rogerson Ltd., the agency orchestrating the BP offer, to promote its equity offering. 
TV ads already are on the air. 

   Critics say such campaigns contain plenty of potential for abuse. 

   "I personally believe in a fair amount of promotional activity," Spicer &amp; Pegler's Mr. Willott says. 
But, he says, "I equally worry about Joe Public being invited to subscribe to what is an entirely new business with no track record." 

   In the U.S., Securities and Exchange Commission rules require companies to stick to the contents of propsectuses in any public discussions of an offering. 
Lawyers usually advise companies to keep very quiet. 
Here, the rules allow more leeway. 
In fact, it was the government that began making all the noise, as part of its effort to build share ownership and stamp out socialism. 

   In international offerings -- 20% or more of the BP shares are being sold overseas -- underwriters play by different rules in different countries. 
BP officials and advisers repeatedly have declined to discuss any aspect of the BP issue with The Wall Street Journal or with any other U.S.-based news organization, citing SEC rules. 
Their refusals have continued even though an SEC official said last year that non-U.S. companies can't remove themselves from the scope of U.S. regulations simply by banning contact with U.S. news organizations. 

   As in the U.S., offerings in Britain can't be made without dull documents crammed with financial statements and carefully worded caveats. 
The difference lies in Britain's use of ads to urge people to apply for shares. 
The ads aren't allowed to say much, but creative presentation, a big budget and a favorable press nonetheless drum up feverish interest. 

   Britain began honing its promotional skills with the 1984 offering of British Telecommunications. 
Last year's offering of British Gas featured a #40 million advertising campaign centered on a mythical investor named Sid. 

   The British Treasury says about 20% of British adults now own shares, compared with 7% eight years ago, and even Labor Party leaders are softening their opposition to wider share ownership. 

   The budget for the BP campaign hasn't been disclosed. 
Critics find the ads -- built around the slogan "Be part of it" -- even cornier than the British Gas effort. 
But the message apparently works. 

   One TV ad associates the BP offer with the previous British Telecom, British Gas and British Airways offers, all of which made investors fat initial profits. 
The government added a twist to the BP offer, giving investors who signed up for applications by last Friday a guaranteed allotment of shares. 
By last week, 5.5 million people had signed up, and tens of thousands more couldn't get through a lastminute switchboard jam. 

   The frenzy of publicity almost obscures the fact that BP stock has been available on the open market for years. 
In this sale, the government is simply getting rid of its remaining 31.5% stake in the oil company as well as offering #1.5 billion of new shares to raise capital for BP. 

   Homa Motamen, an analyst at CIBC Securities Europe Ltd., says Shell Transport &amp; Trading Co., the British arm of Royal Dutch/Shell Group, is a better buy on fundamentals, and many other analysts agree. 

   Most of them nonetheless recommend the BP offer because of its structure. 
The three-part payment plan allows the government to state a high nominal total price while still promising investors a big gain on the initial installment. 

   Backers of the campaign say BP and the previous government share offerings have pointed the way to better marketing of financial services. 

   "There is a huge potential investment marketplace," Anthony Carlisle, Dewe Rogerson's managing director, says. 
But most investment advertising is complicated and puts off the public, he says. 

   "Privatizations have proved the point," he says. 
"Here is something that has been presented as simple, appropriate, good value, accessible and exciting." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
