ID: 91	RANK: 10	SCORE: 13.804031
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880614-0104 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Dance: Choreography's the Trouble at ABT </HL>
<AUTHOR> Dale Harris </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Let's hope that the gala performance by American Ballet Theater that opened the First New York International Festival of the Arts on Saturday was not a paradigm for the entire monthlong celebration. 
Though the evening got off to a brilliant start with Mark Morris's "Drink to Me Only With Thine Eyes," it then, suddenly and irrevocably, fell flat on its face. 

   The problem, as usual, was the choreography -- on this occasion, two works new to the ABT repertory: Antony Tudor's "Fandango," originally created 25 years ago for the long-vanished Metropolitan Opera Ballet Company; and Clark Tippet's "S.P.E.B.S.Q.S.A," a world premiere. 

   For the resuscitation of "Fandango," underwritten by the Festival, there's really no excuse. 
The ballet, a sophomoric joke about the rivalry of five female dancers (Shawn Black, Deirdre Carberry, Christina Fagundes, Marianna Tcherkassky and Cheryl Yeager), set to some slight keyboard pieces by Antonio Soler, looked choreographically negligible when it was new. 
It still does, even though nowadays it's a great deal better danced than it was in 1963. 
The genius of Antony Tudor lasted only a few years: from "Lilac Garden" of 1936 to "Romeo and Juliet" of 1943. 
What came before was apprentice work; what came after was a series of earnest, often tedious, failures, interspersed with a number of inconsequential trifles. 
Most of these have been deservedly forgotten. 
It does no service to Tudor's memory to interfere with the workings of a just oblivion. 

   "S.P.E.B.S.Q.S.A." -- surely the worst ballet title since Balanchine's "Glinkaiana" -- stands for the Society for the Preservation and Encouragement of Barber shop Quartet Singing in America. 
Its music is a string of old-fashioned popular songs, such as "Wait Till the Sun Shines, Nellie." 
They are sung from the orchestra pit in close (and not-so-close) harmony by the Cracker Jacks. 
"S.P.E.B.S.Q.S.A." is plainly meant to be a lighthearted romp. 
Indeed, for the undemanding gala audience, it proved a big hit. 
Nevertheless, it's hard to see what future it could possibly have in the regular repertory of ABT, since it contains virtually nothing in the way of dance interest. 

   Though conceived, formally speaking, in terms of a vaudeville act, the ballet is less like a professional show than an all-male college romp, in which a group of ordinary fellas -- on this occasion, four of them -- do a lot of horsin' around, mainly to the delight of one another. 
There's the usual joke about the fella who kisses another fella, who mimes mock outrage and disgust. 
There's the inevitable skit in which one of these regular guys dresses up in drag and plays a comic vamp, complete with breasts made of watermelon halves. 
There's the familiar soft-shoe number, in which they wear striped shirts, suspenders and straw hats. 
There's the inescapable number that, right at the end, introduces a serious note into the hitherto comic proceedings. 

   Despite the built-in problems of such a concept (which include the fact that a barbershop quartet makes less impact in a house the size of the Met than a solo piano), it's just conceivable that the piece might nevertheless have turned out to be charming had it been staged by someone who, like Twyla Tharp, is both an inventive choreographer and an aficionado of popular music and dance forms. 
Mr. Tippet, alas, is neither, and the results are merely dull. 
Until, that is, the final, serious number, when, without warning, "S.P.E.B.S.Q.S.A." descends into bathos and becomes a ballet about male bonding. 
In what is clearly intended as the climax of the work (the equivalent of "But seriously, folks . . ."), the choreographer presents a pair of lyrical pas de deux, a celebration, in other words, of the buddy beautiful. 
And this -- without a hint of irony -- is set to "America the Beautiful." 
Even as danced by four of ABT's most talented males, John Gardner, Robert Hill, Kevin McKenzie and the astonishingly agile Robert Wallace, Mr. Tippet's latest work is tough going. 

   With this artistically uneven program, which ended with Leonide Massine's joyless "Gaite Parisienne," ABT brought its annual eight-week engagement at the Met to a close. 
Apart from Mr. Morris's "Drink to Me Only With Thine Eyes," the rewards of the season have been less creative than interpretive. 
One of the most memorable events of this sort was the pair of "Bayadere" performances danced, with hardly any warning to the public, by two guests from Leningrad's Kirov Ballet, Altynai Assylmuratova and Farukh Ruzimatov. 
Though Ms. Assylmuratova is not a stranger to American audiences, she had never before been given the opportunity to show them the full extent of her gifts. 
At the Met, she enjoyed a well-deserved triumph. 
Above all, she is a dancer whose every movement is informed by intimations of the classical ideal. 
In the second act of "La Bayadere," she performed the steps with a combination of precision and passion, of impersonal beauty and emotional depth that no one has displayed in this role since the heyday of Dame Margot Fonteyn. 

   However, she is unlike anyone but herself. 
She shows, it's true, many of the characteristics of the Kirov school, including the consolidation of expressive power in the torso rather than in the legs, which suffer from the weakness of all dancers trained in Leningrad. 
Nevertheless, she is something new in current Soviet dance: a ballerina whose force of personality stems, not from overly dramatic accentuation in phrasing, but from an all-pervasive lyric energy. 
That energy is manifest whether she is moving or still, for which reason she remains part of the dance even when standing on the sidelines. 
Her musicality -- an exceedingly rare quality at the Kirov -- helps too. 
So does her remarkable beauty. 
Her small, exquisitely molded head, set on a long tapering neck and framed by sleek black hair, distills the beauty of her movements into a drama that has less to do with personality than with spirit. 

   Her partner, Mr. Ruzimatov, though the Kirov's finest male dancer by far, is less extraordinary, a performer who, at his best, pleases rather than thrills. 
He may not jump very high, for example, but he lands with pantherine grace. 

   Met audiences, brainwashed by the untiring advocacy of Soviet ballet that appears in the local papers, seem to believe that all male dancers from the U.S.S.R. are superhuman. 
At any rate, every time that Mr. Ruzimatov made a move, they gasped in, for the most part, entirely unwarranted disbelief. 

   As it happens, more than one of the males on ABT's regular roster can eclipse Mr. Ruzimatov in sheer technical brilliance -- Robert Wallace, for example, or Wes Chapman. 
Or the 21-year-old Julio Bocca, whose gifts are simply prodigious. 
What the Soviet performer has over his ABT counterparts, however, is coaching. 
When Mr. Bocca appeared as Albrecht during the last week of the season, his dancing, though breathtaking, had nothing to do with his characterization, or even with the way he presented himself to the audience. 
The steps were astounding, the other aspects of his performance virtually nonexistent. 
It's a problem ABT needs to address. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
