ID: 91	RANK: 59	SCORE: 5.894623
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870513-0108 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Dance:
Nureyev and ABT
---
By Dale Harris</HL>
<DD> 05/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The most interesting thing about American Ballet Theater's sumptuous new presentation of "Giselle" is that Mikhail Baryshnikov, the company's director, managed to stage it at minimal cost. 
While starring in Herbert Ross's forthcoming film "Giselle" (despite the title, not a record of the ballet, but a drama about the private life of a dancer), Mr. Baryshnikov closed what is reported to be a highly advantageous deal to acquire the sets and costumes especially made for the scenes that feature the classic work. 
ABT last presented "Giselle" at the Met in the shabby and unconvincing staging of David Blair, ineffectually revised by Mr. Baryshnikov. 

   Thanks to the latter's business acumen, the new "Giselle" looks anything but shabby, yet it is still dramatically unconvincing. 
Indeed, apart from the handsome and highly detailed new designs (by Gianni Quaranta and Anna Anni), virtually everything has remained the same: Mr. Baryshnikov, responsible for the current staging, has made no attempt to improve the narrative cogency of the old production. 

   As a result, one of the central masterpieces of theater dance continues to leave an impression of incoherence and dullness. 
There are good reasons why "Giselle" -- after "La Sylphide," the oldest ballet in the repertory -- should have lasted for almost 150 years. 

   For one thing, its dance images are, to a remarkable degree, both vivid and eloquent. 
When posed in arabesque behind the kneeling figure of Albrecht, the nobleman who betrayed her, the ghostly Giselle becomes at once a character, an ideal and a talisman: a spirit in search of rest, an emblem of purity and an embodiment of selfless protectiveness. 
Moreover, the title role, which demands as much proficiency in acting as in dancing, enables the ballerina to demonstrate not merely versatility but largeness of soul. 

   With a combination of graphic mime and expressive movement, Giselle reveals the heroine's transformation from a vibrant, enamored girl to a supernatural wraith, whose solicitude for Albrecht affirms the power of love to reach beyond the grave. 

   In order for these meanings to make their proper impact, "Giselle" must be staged in such a way as to sustain the essential narrative facts. 
At ABT, they are not. 
Instead of dealing herself a mortal blow with Albrecht's sword, as Theophile Gautier's original scenario specifies, Giselle dies of a broken heart. 
Or a heart attack. 
Possibly both. 
Why she should be buried in unsanctified ground if she has not committed suicide, however, is quite unclear, especially since it is only because her grave is located in the forest rather than in the local churchyard that those who come to pay their respects to her after nightfall run the risk of being attacked by the avenging Wilis. 

   But the most egregious of the production's failings is that it makes nonsense of the theme of salvation through love, which is at the very heart of "Giselle." 
Because, in Act Two, Giselle has only just been inducted into the Wilis, she retains enough earthly feeling to try to protect Albrecht from her demonic sisters by leading him to the cross over her grave. 
As long as he remains there, he is safe. 
Thus Myrthe, the Queen of the Wilis, forces Giselle to dance seductively so that Albrecht will be drawn away from the cross and into the Wilis' power. 

   At ABT, there is no sign that anyone understands what is supposed to be going on in this scene. 
As soon as Giselle, under the command of Myrthe, starts to dance, Albrecht, without the slightest sign of distress, simply advances toward Giselle as if keeping a long-arranged appointment, with the result that the nature of Giselle's concern is obscured. 
For a production that places so much emphasis on scenic verisimilitude, there are simply too many of these lapses from plausibility. 
Giselle's mother is played by some of the youngest dancers in the company. 
The gamekeeper, whose love for Giselle precipitates the tragic action, is dressed in silks. 
Giselle emerges from her tomb by means of a Lazy Susan that swivels, rather shakily, to reveal her posing demurely on top of her grave. 
At the end, she climbs the little hillock on which her cross stands, arranges herself neatly, the Lazy Susan goes into action and she is jerked out of sight. 
Or almost out of sight. 

   Those seated on the right of the auditorium can watch her climbing down the other side of the hillock into the wings. 
Of the Giselles I saw, Marianna Tcherkassky and Amanda McKerrow performed the steps exceptionally well. 
But neither gave the character much individuality or spiritual depth. 
Alessandra Ferri, who always looks as if she is going to dance with passionate beauty, invariably weakens in strength and concentration after a few minutes. 
She paid only minimal attention to her partner, the well-schooled Kevin Mackenzie. 
He, like Ms. McKerrow's partner, Patrick Bissell, needs coaching in narrative projection. 
All of the foregoing could have learned much from watching Rudolf Nureyev as Albrecht. 

   In the second of his guest appearances with ABT, Mr. Nureyev, partnering Ms. Tcherkassky, gave what must stand as his finest performance in New York for a decade. 
In contrast with his appearances last summer with the Paris Opera Ballet, he acknowledged his physical limitations, avoiding steps unsuitable for a dancer nearing 50, and leaving an impression of complete technical mastery. 
His "entrechats six," double "assembles," air turns and pirouettes were swift, sure and stylish. 
Above all, he invested his dancing with a sense of commitment such as no one currently performing with ABT seems able to achieve, but without which ballets like "Giselle" cannot come to life. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
