ID: 91	RANK: 70	SCORE: 5.536385
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870102-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
The Tudor Hegemony
---
By Dale Harris</HL>
<DD> 01/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Dance is the most exemplary of the performing arts. 
From the discipline, the skill, the pride, the sense of communality that come into view every time the curtain rises on a company like New York City Ballet or Twyla Tharp Dance, a whole code of ethics can be inferred. 
Can be and is, in all likelihood, inferred by thousands nowadays. 
How else to explain why the last three representatives of dance chosen for Kennedy Center awards in the performing arts have stood out from virtually all the other honorees by virtue of being achievers rather than stars, significant creators rather than beloved entertainers? 

   In 1985, when an award went to Merce Cunningham, the heroic originator of post-modern dance, his fellow honorees included such national favorites as Beverly Sills and Bob Hope. 
In 1983 -- there was no award for dance in 1984 -- Katherine Dunham, the great pioneer of black ethnic dance, who labors today in a ghetto in East St. Louis, shared the spotlight with stars as widely acclaimed and richly rewarded as Frank Sinatra and James Stewart. 
This year, American Ballet Theatre's "Choreographer Emeritus" Antony Tudor took his place in the president's box beside Lucille Ball, Yehudi Menuhin, Hume Cronyn, Jessica Tandy and Ray Charles, all of them known far and wide for their remarkable accomplishments, but all, with the exception of Mr. Tudor and Mr. Charles, executants, rather than originators, of art. 

   The recognition of Antony Tudor by the Kennedy Center must strike anyone aware of the history of theatrical dance in this country during the past half-century as entirely fitting. 
An emigrant from England who arrived here in 1939, Mr. Tudor was a founding member of what was then called simply Ballet Theatre. 
After a period of acclimatization he became the company's first important choreographer -- indeed, except for Jerome Robbins, who quickly departed, its only one. 
With the critical and popular triumph of "Pillar of Fire" in 1942, he both defined the fledgling company's stylistic character and justified its existence as a serious enterprise. 

   According to the late Edwin Denby, the most perceptive of our dance writers, "Pillar of Fire" single-handedly put an end to the domination exercised over the public's imagination in those days by the Ballet Russe (Denby's collected "Dance Writings" will be published by Knopf next week). 
Because of Mr. Tudor's achievement, audiences found it possible for the first time to accept a specifically American sensibility in ballet. 
Above all, "Pillar of Fire" showed that a theatrical form that most people had hitherto regarded as appropriate for nothing but exotic, high-class diversion could communicate recognizable truths in terms of a beguiling theatrical poetry, that ballet, in other words, could both entertain and answer to one's deepest imaginative needs. 

   "Pillar of Fire," often called the first psychological ballet, attempted to project through dance the interior lives of its participants, especially its heroine, Hagar, who in the panic induced by self-doubt gives herself to a man she does not love. 
First seen at a time when the discoveries of Freud were beginning to percolate into the general consciousness, the work touched a nerve. 
But its success was based upon something more than fashionableness. 
Even when, as happened during the course of the following decade, the story line of "Pillar of Fire" no longer stirred anybody, the formal coherence of the ballet continued to give pleasure. 

   Mr. Tudor extended the range of ballet to include psychological and narrative expressivity, but he did so without weakening the inherent symbolic power of classical ballet technique. 
Though it is hard to grasp the fact today, when the boundaries between kinds of dance are so much less firmly drawn than they were 40 years ago, his courage in fusing ballet and modern dance into a newly articulate language of movement was immense. 
The first major choreographer in this country to combine seemingly antithetical styles of movement, he was, in fact, pioneering the very eclecticism, the freedom from categorization by technique, that increasingly dominates the dance scene today. 

   Nevertheless, there is no getting around the fact that his works do not have anything like the same impact on audiences that they once did. 
For one thing, they have become harder and harder to stage with conviction. 
Story ballets have been out of fashion for so long now that it is virtually impossible to find dancers who can communicate feeling and dramatic action in the gestural manner called for by the greater part of his output. 
"Pillar of Fire," "Lilac Garden" and "Romeo and Juliet," the choreographer's masterpieces, all require techniques of characterization that during the last generation have been bred out of American dancers in favor of other, more kinetic skills. 

   While ABT can claim that its repertory is never without at least one of the choreographer's pieces, and that, during its annual New York season, it usually devotes an entire evening to his work, dance followers have become increasingly aware that Antony Tudor's claim on the present is less the durability of his ballets than the strength of his character. 

   His ruthlessness in the studio is legendary. 
So is his impersonality. 
Not one of the dancers most closely associated with his work in this country took part in the Kennedy Center awards: Nora Kaye, Sallie Wilson, Hugh Laing. 
In the film devoted to his career that was shown in Washington -- and on the recent telecast of the awards -- the choreographer says that what he always wanted from his performers was to be treated as God. 
Though the self-irony is evident, so is the belief in the need for absolute commitment to the rigors of art. 
That, more than anything else, is his legacy to American dance. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
