ID: 91	RANK: 71	SCORE: 5.517238
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880518-0123 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Dance: Ups and Downs at ABT </HL>
<AUTHOR> Dale Harris </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   American Ballet Theatre has much to offer. 
Above all, it has a repertory that ranges from the full-length classics to Antony Tudor, and that also includes works commissioned from bold young choreographers such as Mark Morris. 
ABT's dancing, in addition, is energetic and engaging. 
It's a pleasure to see performers so eager to impress. 
An extended season, like the one in progress at the Metropolitan Opera House, shows certain aspects of the company to advantage: The longer the engagement, the more one appreciates director Mikhail Baryshnikov's emphasis on ensemble, as well as his solicitude toward young dancers of great promise such as Ricardo Bustamante, Wes Chapman, Christine Dunham, Robert Hill, Amy Rose, Dana Stackpole and Jennet Zerbe. 

   After only a few weeks of such a season, though, doubts begin to obtrude. 
The majority of evenings at ABT are bland. 
A program of ballets by Petipa, Tudor and Balanchine, such as the company regularly offers nowadays, poses too many stylistic challenges for the present generation of dancers to cope with successfully. 
Since the dancers' only recourse is to stylistic generalization, most of the works they perform lack any sense of individual identity. 
Forty years ago, the company could bring off similar programs without difficulty, doubtless because every one of the dancers, from principals to members of the corps de ballet, shared the conviction that the classical technique exemplified not merely prowess but personality. 
As a result, they all instinctively sought to endow their movements with an expressive style appropriate to the nature of whatever piece they were appearing in. 

   The presence in those days of a strong-willed resident choreographer, Mr. Tudor, did not inhibit the versatility of the dancers; it simply reinforced their artistic kinship. 
Above all, it gave them a common goal of high seriousness. 
Though markedly different in both temperament and physique, ABT's ballerinas, Nora Kaye and Alicia Alonso, were equally at home in ballets such as Petipa's "Black Swan," Tudor's "Lilac Garden" and Balanchine's "Apollo" or "Waltz Academy." 
Today's ABT dancers lack the adaptability of their predecessors because they lack their distinctiveness. 
Denied strong creative guidance, a clear sense of purpose, they have no idea of who they are artistically, and thus of how they should dance in any given work. 

   They can hardly feel very reassured by this season's new productions, which represent a bewildering variety of approaches to ballet: Mr. Baryshnikov's recension of Petipa's "Raymonda: Grand Pas Classique"; Balanchine's "Ballet Imperial" (1941) and "Stravinsky Violin Concerto" (1972); Leonide Massine's "Gaite Parisienne" (1938); and world premieres by Agnes de Mille ("The Informer"), Clark Tippet ("Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1") and Mark Morris ("Drink to Me Only"). 

   These additions to the repertory seem to have been arrived at less through artistic conviction than through the needs of the marketplace. 
To keep the large Lincoln Center audience happy, Mr. Baryshnikov has adopted the attitude of a shopkeeper who offers as wide a range of tempting wares as he can find and makes it the responsibility of the customer to decide what is good and what is bad. 

   For all his artistic irresponsibility, Mr. Baryshnikov's marketing is brilliant. 
The launching of "Gaite Parisienne" was achieved with the kind of eclat that usually goes into the debut of a new scent. 
Massine's 50-year-old ballet, though always choreographically vapid, used to be watchable because of the star performances it drew from the likes of Alexandra Danilova and Frederic Franklin, dancers of irresistible allure. 
No doubt realizing that the ballet could never be adequately cast from the ranks of today's ABT, Mr. Baryshnikov decided to offer it as a fashion parade, inviting Christian Lacroix, the couturier of the moment, to supply the costumes. 

   This Mr. Lacroix has failed to do. 
Instead of theatrical costumes, he has designed dresses. 
Not only are they too detailed to make a strong effect in the vast spaces of the Met auditorium, they are too self-sufficient. 
They do not move with the dancers; they compete with them. 
As for the men, he has hardly bothered with them at all. 
The garish, unatmospheric scenery of Zack Brown only seconds Mr. Lacroix in overloading Massine's poor little work, which never should have been called back from the dead. 

   The coarseness with which this "Gaite Parisienne" was conceived does at least ensure that one's attention is held, at least the first time round. 
Ms. de Mille's "The Informer," based loosely upon the novel of Liam O'Flaherty -- and, I imagine, John Ford's film of it -- offers nothing so compelling. 
Reducing the story of the Sinn Fein rebellion of 1922 to a triangle with a tragic outcome, the choreographer communicates not passion or ideological commitment, but only the memory of other ballets: her own in the musicals "Brigadoon" and "Juno," as well as works by Mr. Tudor and Martha Graham. 
Ms. de Mille's use of folk dances is not only unimaginative, it also looks inappropriate in an urban story. 
The music, derived from some beautiful Irish airs, has been clumsily orchestrated and sounds hopelessly untheatrical. 

   Of the two Balanchine revivals, "Violin Concerto," with its highly dramatic departures from classical decorum, works better than "Ballet Imperial," which calls for a grandeur the company hasn't yet learned from last year's production of "The Sleeping Beauty." 
Mr. Baryshnikov's "Raymonda," choreographically impoverished by his elimination of Petipa's character dances, demands the same quality: the ability to exemplify the moral virtues implicit in the skill, grace and nobility of classical dancing. 
None of this is communicated either by Mr. Baryshnikov's staging or by his dancers, who seem completely lost. 
Barbara Matera's bulky costumes and towering headgear are no help to anyone. 

   Much more satisfying was the new work of a fledgling choreographer, Clark Tippet, whose "Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1" was comely, musical and, for the most part, interesting. 
Though it occasionally shows signs of the choreographer's need to seem inventive, the piece has far from negligible virtues, not the least of which is the many opportunities it gives for first-rate dancing. 
At the second performance in New York, Alessandra Ferri and Amy Rose were especially good. 
These days, when ballet makers seem intent on trashing the classical tradition, it is encouraging to find someone willing to see what it can yield. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
