ID: 91	RANK: 75	SCORE: 5.460449
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870218-0172 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "The Sleeping Beauty" is not merely the greatest surviving ballet of the 19th century, it is also for Americans the most influential. 
The Royal Ballet's production, presented at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1949, was chiefly responsible for kicking off the current dance boom. 
Moreover, the whole of Balanchine's output from "Apollo" on is in effect a gloss on Marius Petipa's choreography for this work. 

   So the importance of American Ballet Theatre's new "Sleeping Beauty" cannot be overestimated. 
Given its world premiere last week at Chicago's resplendent Auditorium Theater, and due to open during the next few months in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Washington and New York, the staging is the first in this country since 1949 to reveal a full awareness of Petipa's genius. 
Respectful of the original choreographic script, it provides audiences with a touchstone of the classical style. 

   Not that ABT's success is complete. 
Sir Kenneth MacMillan's production does scant justice to the work's fairy-tale component -- something that has less to do with fantasy than with narrative clarity and symbolic meaning. 
In this production, for example, the Lilac Fairy's function as the agent of Providence is sometimes obscured: For one thing, she plays too uncertain a part in conjuring forth the creepers that hide the sleeping castle until the advent of the prince. 

   In addition, the conception of act two is more tricky than persuasive: It is while hunting at night among the ruined columns of Aurora's castle that the prince is vouchsafed a vision of his soul mate. 
The finale to this act, in which the Lilac Fairy, impelled by some of Tchaikovsky's most full-hearted music, leads the prince on an extended journey to the castle, looks distressingly paltry. 
A similarly chilling brusqueness marks the subsequent awakening of Aurora and what should seem like the renewal of the entire world after the bestowal of the prince's kiss. 

   Nevertheless, what is right about the venture is far more consequential than what is wrong. 
In 1976, ABT tried to stage the old Royal Ballet version of "The Sleeping Beauty." 
While carefully reproducing the original physical production, the production failed to pay sufficient attention to Petipa's stylistic imperatives. 
This time around, the company has concentrated on how best to realize the nobility and harmony inherent in classical ballet. 
The dancing now is grand, clear, precise. 
The men stretch their feet and pay attention to correct arm positions. 
The women hold their shoulders at a graceful angle, maintain a clean, unbroken line and use their eyes as an adjunct to expressiveness of movement. 
For the first time in many years, ABT looks like a serious classical company, with roots in the past as well as a stake in the future. 

   No doubt the artistic advance at ABT has something to do with the appointment of John Taras, formerly one of Balanchine's most gifted ballet masters, as Mikhail Baryshnikov's associate director. 
Nevertheless, according to the program, the chief responsibility for the success of this "Sleeping Beauty" must be attributed to Sir Kenneth, a fact not without irony, since his overwrought choreography is at least partly responsible for the precipitous decline in the classical skills of the Royal Ballet. 

   A further irony is that Sir Kenneth's previous two productions of "The Sleeping Beauty" -- the first for the German Opera, Berlin, in 1967, the second for the Royal Ballet in 1973 -- were decided failures, the latter indeed being so poor that, though paid for by the American Friends of Covent Garden, it was never shown in the U.S. 

   Luckily, his latest "Sleeping Beauty" is derived not from his own earlier versions but from the one mounted at the Royal Ballet in the forties based on the original Maryinsky notation. 
For the gaps in the Russian script, Sir Kenneth has mostly devised his own dances, as in the Garland Waltz of act one and the Jewels ensemble of act three. 
Though his choreography for these passages is as clumsy and finicky as ever, he has had the good judgment to leave the rest of the work alone and, in the case of Aurora's variation in act two, to prefer the version by Sir Frederick Ashton to one of his own devising. 

   In addition, his respect for "The Sleeping Beauty" has led him to insist that ABT's dancers master the secrets of classical mime, something our dancers usually find it hard to cope with. 
As Sir Kenneth clearly understands, mime is crucial to Petipa, a principal means of expressing narrative, characterization and the sense of hierarchy basic to all his works. 

   The contribution of Nicholas Georgiadis is crucial. 
Though his sets lack coherence and spaciousness, and his sense of color is vapid, his designs for individual costumes, realized to perfection by Anna Watkins, are among the most ravishing and sophisticated in the contemporary theater. 
The oyster satin dress worn by the queen in act one is not only remarkably beautiful, it implies the necessary imaginative context for the role. 

   ABT has several Auroras. 
I saw two, both very fine: the calmly majestic Martine van Hamel and the more brilliant and volatile Amanda McKerrow. 
The former smiled too much, however, and the latter, whose headdress does not flatter her, kept her features too busy. 
Presumably, there will be refinements in all areas during the current national tour (sponsored by Merrill Lynch). 
Even without them, the production is a major event in American ballet. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
