ID: 183	RANK: 42	SCORE: 6.849946
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861215-0118 </DOCNO>
<HL> Why Do Celebrities
Jump Through Hoop
At Snap of a Camera?
---
Magazine Photographers Cast
Strange Spell Over Them;
Forbes in His Pith Helmet
---
By Kathleen A. Hughes
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/15/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A photographer for Life magazine has just told actor Jeff Goldblum that he will be posing for a picture in a garbage can. 
The garbage cans set up for the shot are decorated with wilting lettuce and dead fish. 

   "I don't really want to get in the trash can," says Mr. Goldblum. 
"That means I'm garbage." 
His publicist, Mary Moen, adds, "I don't like the idea at all." 

   The photographer, Mark Sennet, doesn't miss a beat. 
"It's a great visual. 
Composition-wise it works. 
Otherwise we jeopardize the piece. 
But we'll try it both ways." (A Life editor has ordered the shot mainly as a reference to Mr. Goldblum's movie "The Fly.") 

   After 40 minutes, Mr. Sennet has coaxed Mr. Goldblum to sit on the edge of the pail. 
"Lean in on that pail," he yells. 
"Great! 
Perfect! 
Now sit back as far as you can go." 
Within 10 minutes, Mr. Goldblum is seated firmly on the garbage in the can. 
"That's great!" cries the publicist. 

   Every week, a new array of unwitting subjects appear in magazine photographs in preposterous poses. 
It isn't enough to sit and look at the camera. 
The subjects appear leaping through the air while frying an egg, tossing their possessions in the air, or sitting in a bathtub full of soda or milk. 
"The idea is to make the magazine stand out," says Richard B. Stolley, the founding editor of People Weekly and a former managing editor of Life. 

   The shots may sell magazines, but why does anyone agree to get in these poses? 
The answer lies partly in the charm and chatty techniques used by photographers as they convince people it would be fun to, say, leap off a kitchen counter. 
"There's a tyranny to photographers that most people don't resist," says Anthony Frank, the chairman of First Nationwide Bank, a unit of Ford Motor Co. 

   Indeed, the powerful often become putty in the hands of photographers. 
Malcom Forbes, the chairman and editor in chief of Forbes magazine, posed for the July issue of Vanity Fair by donning a pith helmet and sitting at a table on his yacht in front of a chocolate mousse with a burning sparkler in it. 
Mr. Forbes didn't want to wear the pith helmet, which the reporter provided. 
"I said, 'Aw, come on. 
I'll look ridiculous,'" he says. 

   But the reporter, Andre Leon Talley, persisted. 
"He said it will be fun," recalls Mr. Forbes, who concedes he was talked into the shot. 
"I was afraid I would wind up looking like a sap, but it didn't look too bad," he says. 
The quote next to the picture says, "Hope I don't look like Roosevelt in an Iroquois Indian headdress." 

   Mr. Forbes's publication can also dish it out. 
A Forbes reporter told Richard Arendsee, the president of Four Winds Enterprises, a moving and storage company based in San Diego, to bring his hunting outfit for the photo session. 
"We get so tired of the constant pictures of people in business clothes," said the reporter, according to Mr. Arendsee. 
"I thought that's all I need, a picture like that in Forbes. 
I have a very strict dress code in the office," says Mr. Arendsee. 
He nevertheless did as told. 

   Mr. Arendsee began the photo session in a suit and tie in dignified poses in front of the office with his entire staff. 
After a couple of hundred shots, the photographer, Mr. Sennet, asked Mr. Arendsee to get in the hunting outfit and sit alone in a field with his shotgun. 
"I don't know, I just did it. 
I didn't for the life of me think that would be one of the pictures they would use," he says. 

   After the issue of Forbes appeared, with Mr. Arendsee in his hunting outfit, he received more than 100 comments, he says, many of them ribbing from his employees. 
"You with your dress code. 
Tell me more," was a typical comment. 
Says Mr. Arendsee with a sigh, "If I had my druthers, I would have chosen one where I had a coat and tie on." 

   Indeed, photographers often lull their subjects into a false sense of security by taking hundreds of shots of dignified poses while screaming "Great! 
Perfect!" and "Fabulous!" 
Then, they suggest a few leaps -- or an odd outfit. 
Explains Mr. Sennet, the photographer: "You do what they want and then hopefully you can do what you want. 
That's what separates a good photographer from a bad photographer." 

   The weird shot isn't always the one that appears in the magazine. 
Mr. Frank at First Nationwide Bank said a Forbes photographer had the "insane idea" that he should pose having his shoes shined. 
"I had my shoes shined for 22 minutes with a lot of lights. 
There was a great crowd watching," he says. 
However, the picture that appeared was of Mr. Frank seated on a stool in front of a window. 

   Efforts by the subject to take control of the situation rarely work. 
For the Forbes photograph, Mr. Frank suggested a picture with the name of his company in the background. 
"No," the photographer responded, "This is not a commercial." 
Most magazines won't let the subject determine which shot will be used. 

   Randy Miller, the president of Original New York Seltzer in Walnut, Calif., told a People photographer that he wanted to be photographed in front of a grocery-store display of his product. 
No go. 
The photographer, Mr. Sennet, told Mr. Miller he wanted him to drive along posh Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills -- spraying pedestrians and cars with seltzer water. 

   "We sat there and talked, and I decided it was a bad idea," recalls Mr. Miller. 
"I was worried it would look silly." 
So Mr. Sennet told him they would do a lot of different shots but start out by spraying Rodeo Drive. 
Mr. Miller wound up seated in the back of his old Mustang loaded with 200 seltzer bottles heading for Rodeo Drive. 
He sprayed the street and its pedestrians three times before the police came and told them to stop. 
"We never made it to the supermarket," says Mr. Miller. 

   There are, however, those who say no to the photographers. 
Martin Zweig, a New York stock-market forecaster, refused to ride a live bull down Wall Street, according to Raeanne Rubenstein, a contributing photographer for People. 
"I thought it would be wonderful to have him galloping at top speed on the bull in a Brooks Brothers suit," says Ms. Rubenstein. 
"But he couldn't be convinced." 

   However, Mr. Zweig was amenable to posing beside a live bull -- on the condition that a bear also be present. 
The story was, after all, about his book, "Winning on Wall Street." 
But Ms. Rubenstein decided that could be a volatile combination. 
So she positioned Mr. Zweig between a live bull and a stuffed bear. 
In the published photograph, Mr. Zweig's arms are raised, his fists are clenched and he is holding a copy of The Wall Street Journal. 

   "Every time the bull turned its head I was afraid the horn would hit me on the face, and the bull's nose was running," Mr. Zweig recalls. 
"On the whole, I would as soon not have done it." 

   Some draw the line at far more mundane requests. 
Tony Costa, a contributing photographer for People, says that actress Linda Evans once refused to be shown operating a vacuum cleaner. 
"We wanted her to do something pedestrian," he explains. 
Ms. Evans didn't respond to a request for an interview about the vacuum incident. 

   Some subjects ham it up on their own. 
New York Daily News columnist Jimmy Breslin told a People photographer that it would be "fabulous" to be photographed sitting on a bar stool in the street with an umbrella under the spray of an open fire hydrant -- while smoking a cigar. 
"I couldn't believe that was his idea," says Ms. Rubenstein, the photographer. 
The picture appeared in June. 

   But many subjects do as they are told and reflect later. 
Jameel Ahmad, a civil engineer in New York, says he found himself being photographed by Ms. Rubenstein -- waist high in a pothole -- for a People story on his new adhesive for pothole repair. 
"She kept talking. 
We were laughing," he says. 
"Before I realized it, I was in the hole." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
