ID: 183	RANK: 79	SCORE: 5.784312
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871029-0159 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
'Nixon' in Texas Sings for His (Chinese) Supper
---
By Manuela Hoelterhoff</HL>
<DD> 10/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Houston  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Any lingering doubts that Richard Milhous Nixon is totally rehabilitated were put to rest, even to sleep, last Thursday at the Houston Grand Opera. 

   In the new Wortham Center, the company presented the world premiere of "Nixon in China," an opera composed by John Adams, staged by Peter Sellars and ignored by Mr. Nixon. 
He declined an invitation, perhaps fearful that putty noses would be selling in the souvenir booth. 

   What was to worry about? 
He could have taken the family. 
This is an airbrushed, upbeat portrait of our 37th president and his wife, Pat. 
Once upon a time in the baroque era, gilded baskets conveyed helpful gods to the realm of muddling mortals. 
This opera opens with the Nixons (tenor James Maddalena, in dark overcoat, soprano Carolann Page, petite and prim in her red frock) slowly floating down to China in a jet. 

   What could be more divine, or at least pleasant and good for the Nixon name? 
Our final view of Nixon (as opposed to the real Mr. Nixon) is an intimate one. 
He loosens his rep tie and reminisces lyrically to Pat about the hamburger stand he ran during his Navy years in World War II. 

   There is little in the libretto by Alice Goodman that would make Julie Nixon cry. 
This Nixon has no sweat spots; nobody trills "Watergate." 

   Neither could you possibly guess that Mao -- a cordial fellow in a green suit, who has Nixon over for a very long duet -- killed a lot of people and heaven knows how many trees to print his little red book. 
Only Henry Kissinger gets no respect. 
He walks around with his tongue hanging out, uttering inanities and peering over the ugliest glasses in the history of optometry. 

   Now, I have no great problem with the improved view of Mr. Nixon. 
The rascal rose above his early antipathy for "Red" China and ventured forth in 1972 on a diplomatically risky mission to open the gargantuan land to the west. 
The global connections Mr. Nixon crafted then proved more important for the world than the illicit tunneling of his plumbers, and when did you last thank Pat Nixon for the pandas in the Washington zoo? 

   Unfortunately, sanitized politicians have this shortcoming -- they are not quite as interesting on stage as Attila the Hun or Boris Godunov. 
And a successful trip blighted only by boring banquets and ballets isn't the stuff of a dramatic opera. 
"Nixon in China" unfolds like a sappy picture book, once we stop being mildly amazed seeing familiar-looking politicos turning into tenors and delivering such lines as: "Your flight was smooth, I hope?" (Chou En-lai) "Oh, yes, smooooooother than most" (Nixon). 

   Mozart probably couldn't make such lines soar, and Mr. Adams certainly can't. 
What he can do is spin out yards of shimmering music that wrap the evening in pretty textures. 
The 40-year-old composer comes out of the minimalist school, though his repetitive patterns are cut from a finer quality bolt than Philip Glass's. 
Mr. Adams's field of arpeggios does not bloom with a thousand melodies, but "Nixon" has many catchy moments. 
Mao's "Long live the ancestor's. 
Once." was pungently delivered by tenor John Duykers, and there is a funny scene in which Mr. Adams parodies his own repetitive compositional style: 

   "Piggy. 
Piggy. 
Piggy. 
Piggy . . ." babbles a cheerful chorus of Chinese women as Pat tours a model farm and gawps at a big sow as if she's the Winged Victory of Samothrace. 

   More whimsy would have benefited this opera, which -- incredibly -- does not include the visit to the Great Wall. 
The sight of that wonder of the world, you may remember, inspired Mr. Nixon to real eloquence. 
"This is a great wall. . . ." said our president. 
I surely wasn't the only person who expected Mr. Sellars, the director, to have cadres of Maoettes kicking up their heels on this berm. 
The 30-year-old director has a reputation for reducing the guardians of good taste to blather with his cleverly updated productions of classic works by Mozart and Handel. 
But this time, he's caught a case of good manners. 
Too bad. 

   The idea for the opera and the catchy title is Mr. Sellars's, and why he didn't shape the libretto with his urchin hands is beyond me. 
The opera's one brilliant entertainment is a ballet scene choreographed by Mark Morris that finally cuts away from the tedious history lesson into a surrealist fantasy that is more suited to the opera stage. 

   Attending an evening of ballet, Pat gets so frazzled seeing a slave girl whipped by a lusty Chinese warlord (Kissinger in slight disguise) that she leaps to the stage to rescue the damsel. 
Dick then rescues his wife. 
And before you can recite the revolution's three rules of discipline and eight points of attention, there's total pandemonium. 
Mr. Adams helps the fun by quoting purple passages from Richard Strauss and Richard Wagner when a soldier revives the brave slave with a glass of orange juice. 

   More potent stuff might have helped me through the last scene, in which everybody but Kissinger -- vanished by then without explanation -- reminisces and pontificates. 
Mr. Adams made a mistake when he dropped "The Chairman Dances" fox-trot number for Mao and his wife from an earlier version of the opera and turned it into a separate composition (and a big seller for Nonesuch records). 
The current dreary ending needs rethinking before "Nixon in China" pulls out of the Houston Grand Opera and moves on to further performances at Brooklyn's Academy of Music, the Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles and Washington's Kennedy Center. 

   In the meanwhile, Wortham Center could use some help as well. 
This new brick behemoth in downtown Houston is owned and operated by the city with the opera company as chief tenant. 
Lightness and grace are not the leading virtues of its main facade's single, heavy, huge arch. 
Inside, the vast foyer is either expecting an airplane or a decorator. 

   But the two theaters (one seats 2,176, the other 1,666), are so pleasantly scaled for both the human voice and legs that one forgives a lavish use of maroon paint on the walls. 
What worries me are the pit acoustics, especially in the big house. 
Even miked, Mooged and forcefully led by conductor John DeMain, "Nixon" didn't emerge clearly from the orchestra pit. 
And at the unmiked "Aida" last Wednesday, I had to hike up to the boxes to hear Verdi's distinctly non-minimalist orchestrations. 
Downstairs, the sound was as sludgy as the mud-colored production by Pier Luigi Pizzi, though voices came through easily. 
Submerging the pit in the manner of Bayreuth does not seem to have had happy results in Houston. 
Adjustments can hopefully be made. 

   At my performance, plucky Ilona Tokody sang Aida after only a few hours' notice and a long flight from Budapest. 
She substituted for Mirella Freni who was sick that night. 
But what's Mr. Pizzi's excuse? 
In this $650,000 empty-looking production, principals spend half the evening singing in front of huge and hideous sliding doors while the sets are being changed. 
These are minimal and usually include a big statue of a bald deity with some plastic pachyderms rolled in for a skimpy triumphal scene. 
There is no perceptible concept and you wonder where the money went, a question often asked in Houston these days. 

   It did not go into Placido Domingo's costume. 
He sang Radames tucked into a mini so skimpy a small armadillo could have worn it as a cummerbund. 
But if the man looked weird, at least he sounded splendid, singing particularly expressively in the last-act scene with mezzo Stefania Toczyska. 
She herself was an unusually vivid Amneris. 
When they joined together in song, you almost forgot this was an "Aida" with plastic elephants, no camels and no horse sense. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
