ID: 244	RANK: 30	SCORE: 10.620323
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880513-0150 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Centenary Salute to Irving Berlin </HL>
<AUTHOR> John McDonough </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   This week, as everyone knows by now, America's greatest living songwriter turned 100. 
And Wednesday evening the royalty of musical America trooped to the big birthday party here at Carnegie Hall for Irving Berlin. 
It was a stirring, emotional, and perhaps historic procession: Leonard Bernstein, Frank Sinatra, Isaac Stern, Tony Bennett, Ray Charles, Marilyn Horne, Jule Styne, Hal Davis, Sammy Cahn, Irving Caesar, Burton Lane, the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts and the Army. 
But Mr. Berlin spent the evening at home, nine blocks east on Beekman Place. 

   The producers of the birthday program would have settled for even a call. 
But by 10:30, the $1,000-a-seat crowd was left all alone by the telephone. 

   While I don't mean to criticize Mr. Berlin for his absence, I can't help thinking there comes a time in every great man's life when his need to be honored declines in inverse proportion to the need of everybody else to honor him. 
Mr. Berlin's is such a case. 
He's lived long enough to watch five generations embrace his music. 
Long enough to see the impact of his work penetrate our civilization so that his stature has transcended any conceivable homage that might be paid. 
So of course, the challenge to try becomes irresistible. 

   Irving Berlin began life as a Russian Jew in czarist Siberia and rose to become a vastly wealthy musical empire: Berlin melodies with Berlin lyrics published by Berlin Music Inc. 
A great melody has an ineluctable logic about it that makes it seem predestined from the first note. 
It's Mr. Berlin's astonishing powers of alchemy that have converted the neutrality of the diatonic scale into so many nuances of logic and emotion. 
So the world has given him the best it could give in trade for his tunes -- fame, money, recognition beyond comprehension. 
And when the world could give him no more, fate added time and good health to his gifts. 

   Chronologically, he is the second of the six great writers who have defined the classic American song: coming after Jerome Kern (1885) and just before Cole Porter (1892), George Gershwin (1898), Richard Rodgers (1902) and Harold Arlen (1905). 
He's survived them all, as well as numberless trends and the institution of Tin Pan Alley that launched him. 
He's even outlived some of his own copyrights ("Alexander's Ragtime Band," 1911). 
But he hasn't outlived the appeal of his music, which for all its apparent simplicity, defies typecasting. 

   If Mr. Berlin is to song as Norman Rockwell is to art or Frank Capra is to film, as some like to say, then how do we account for the unexpected Berlin of "Supper Time," the stylish Berlin of "Cheek to Cheek," the ironic Berlin of "Change Partners," or the chromatic Berlin of "White Christmas"? 
If great writers write in bold signatures, then Mr. Berlin writes with invisible ink. 

   Mr. Berlin was not an auteur. 
He was a pro, a craftsman. 
His vision was directed outward. 
Songs are products, not art. 
He sometimes even plagiarized his own hits ("Alexander's Bagpipe Band," 1912). 
"Give the public what it wants," he would say. 
The customer is always right. 
Pianist Dick Hyman -- whose new album of Berlin music on Musicmasters joins other centennial efforts by Tony Bennett (CBS), Michael Feinstein (Parnassus), and Elizabeth Welch (Verve), and practically everybody else in the CBS two-LP anthology "A Hundred Years" -- says: "Among his peers, Berlin has the least musical education. 
It was sheer native genius that took him to the levels of sophistication he reached, yet he still kept his feet on the street. 
Gershwin, for instance, was well grounded in theory and consciously reached for the innovations he achieved. 
Berlin, I believe, came to his almost instinctively. 
He could move in and out of melodic formulas according to his own higher logic." 

   The power of Mr. Berlin's melodies sometimes leads us to underestimate the power of his words. 
But the wrong words mean the wrong song. 
In 1917 he wrote a forgotten failure called "Smile and Show Your Dimple." 
In 1933 he reintroduced the same tune outfitted in new words: "In your Easter bonnet . . ." "He was a poet," says composer Morton Gould. "'All alone by the telephone' tells you everything there is to know about loneliness in the 20th century." 
Mr. Gould's comment was borne out Wednesday when Garrison Keillor merely recited the words to the Carnegie Hall audience. 

   If his years and eminence have rewarded him, though, they've also isolated him. 
As his contemporaries and peers have died, so have the camaraderie and shared experience that kept him moving with the world. 
When there's no one left outside of George Abbott, 101, who feels comfortable calling you by your first name, that's isolation. 
Happily, Mr. Berlin still has his wife of 62 years and his three daughters. 
Beyond them and a tight circle of associates, however, Mr. Berlin holds the world at bay, walled off in a silken cocoon of nonnegotiable privacy two blocks south of America's other most famous recluse, Greta Garbo. 
There he sits like the High Lama of Shangri-La as absolute master of his own self-created domain. 
He wouldn't even allow a closed-circuit feed from Carnegie Hall set up in his home Wednesday. 
Those few with access become like monks when asked about any aspect of Mr. Berlin's private life or current activities. 
Even the songs he reportedly still writes are a state secret. 
Incredibly, not one biographer has so far managed to penetrate the code of silence to produce a serious Berlin biography. 

   "He feels pretty good," a spokeswoman said two weeks ago in a brief phone interview. 
She then asked that her name not be used in this column. 

   Mr. Berlin has been a member of ASCAP since its founding in 1914, and he still remains active in its affairs. 
But even ASCAP President Morton Gould, 79, has never actually met Mr. Berlin. 
Mr. Gould's predecessor, lyricist Hal David, who served from 1980 to 1986, says, "My whole relationship with him has been a telephone friendship. 
I've never actually seen him. 
He would call me about things he read in the trades or heard through the grapevine. 
He likes to talk about his contemporaries like Harold Arlen too." 

   Now he'll be helping preserve them all. 
Proceeds from the centennial will benefit the ASCAP Foundation and Carnegie Hall Society. 
On Friday, May 27, CBS will telecast Wednesday's gala in a two-hour special. 

   ---
   Mr. McDonough is a free-lance music writer based in Chicago. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
