ID: 218	RANK: 69	SCORE: 9.192377
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880421-0086 </DOCNO>
<HL> Proliferation of 'Advertorials' Blurs Distinction Between News and Ads </HL>
<AUTHOR> Cynthia Crossen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PUB MKT </IN>
<TEXT>
   This is not an advertisement. 

   Such a warning might seem superfluous on a page that's obviously filled with editorial material. 
But with the proliferation of "advertorials," those special advertising sections dressed up to look like their host publications, it is becoming increasingly difficult to tell what's what inside magazines. 

   The blurring of the distinction between editorial and advertising could get worse. 
Although no one keeps statistics on how many magazine pages are devoted to advertorials, most people in the industry believe the number is growing. 
Furthermore, few magazines reject them outright; even the New Yorker, long a holdout, two years ago began accepting them. 
The reason for all this interest: increasingly ferocious competition for advertising dollars. 
Magazine publishers say there's more pressure than ever to offer advertisers an enticing environment for their ads, and the most enticing of all may be the advertorial. 

   To critics of advertorials, which combine traditional advertising with text that looks like editorial, the very name is symbolic of the problem. 
To them, it suggests that there could be a legitimate hybrid creature with a little advertising and a little editorial material. 
Magazine purists say that everything in a story is either one or the other, and if a section is prepared for an advertiser, it's advertising and should be called that. 

   Some newspapers, including The Wall Street Journal, also publish advertorials. 
But newspaper advertorials provoke less controversy because it's much harder to make them look like a regular newspaper page. 

   Magazine advertorials seem to be everywhere these days. 
The May issue of Texas Monthly has an advertorial on Sea World in San Antonio. 
A recent issue of the New Yorker had one on European travel. 
New York magazine, which is scheduled to publish nine advertorials this year, ran one in March called Dream Vacations. 
Redbook's advertorial on Parent-Teacher Associations in last September's issue was so successful, the magazine will repeat it this year. 
And in its most recent issue, Sports Illustrated had two advertorials -- one on the Kentucky Derby, the other on the National Basketball Association playoffs. 

   Not surprisingly, many advertisers like advertorials. 
Such sections allay their anxieties about what readers will think or feel when looking at the article next to the ad. 
"What every advertiser wants is to be far forward, on a right-hand page and against suitable or compatible editorial," says James Guthrie, a former advertising executive and now executive vice president/marketing development of Magazine Publishers of America, an industry trade group. 
"With one of these, you're guaranteed to be right in the middle of suitable and compatible editorial." 

   That's a troubling guarantee for magazine editors, most of whom try to protect their realm from commercial contamination. 
Editors worry that confused readers will hold them responsible for the sins of the advertorials. 
Advertorial text, which typically isn't prepared by the editorial staff of the publication, can be not only poorly written, but also one-sided. 
"I once saw a man on an airplane pick up Manhattan,inc., read an advertorial for a few minutes and then throw down the magazine in disgust," says Jane Amsterdam, former editor of the magazine. 
"That guy thought what he was reading was Manhattan,inc., and I knew he would never read it again." 

   Magazine publishers have their own set of fears. 
They appreciate advertorial revenue but often feel uneasy about the dependencies the sections may foster. 
"They're a big trap," says Laura Freid, publisher and editor-in-chief of Bostonian magazine. 
"You can introduce advertisers who might not otherwise be in the magazine, but then they're going to want that environment every time. 
You end up destroying the market for typical advertising." 

   Although Bostonian has published only one advertorial in the past two years, Ms. Freid says she feels pressure from advertisers "to keep up with the Joneses." 
Advertisers have said "we'll come in if you create a section," Ms. Freid says. 

   G. Douglas Johnston, publisher of Vanity Fair, which doesn't accept advertorials, says he too has felt the pressure. 
"The proliferation of magazines has gotten to where you have to do something to get the attention of advertisers," he says. 
"But we don't want our sales force to focus on selling something that's not the magazine." 

   For some small magazines, advertorials have provided much-needed sustenance in lean times. 
Spy magazine cofounder E. Graydon Carter says its advertorials fed the infant publication when other ads were scarce. 
Mr. Carter and his colleagues aren't without their reservations about advertorials, however. 
In their list of the 100 most annoying, alarming and appalling phenomena of 1987, Spy included its own advertorials for J&amp;B scotch. 
They "helped irreverent new magazine pay its printers' bills," the item said, but then went on to note that advertorials "consumed 10% of (its) pages" and "dangerously blurred the distinction between editorial and advertising material." 

   Even so, the magazine will continue to run the sections. 
And Mr. Carter doesn't think he should be criticized for the practice. 
"That's the high moral stance that editors at highly profitable magazines can afford to take," he says. 

   When planning advertorials, advertisers often ask publishers to make them look as much like ordinary editorial material as possible. 
"You buy a magazine because it carries the right readers, and it has the right editorial policies that draw those readers," says Mr. Guthrie of Magazine Publishers of America. 
"So I want to be sure that whatever qualities draw the readers aren't changed when they come to the supplement." 

   Responding to that desire, the American Society of Magazine Editors created guidelines for special advertising sections. 
Among other things, the guidelines say that every page of text must be conspicuously identified as a paid message, that the type should be different from that in the rest of the publication and that the section shouldn't be trumpeted on the magazine's cover or in its table of contents. 
Every month an ASME committee gathers to review advertorials that have breached these rules and to write the offending magazine publishers warning letters. 

   The most common infraction is not labeling as advertising each advertorial page. 
"Some agencies and advertisers do pressure publishers to take those tags off," says Ralph R. Schulz, senior vice president-editorial at McGraw-Hill Inc. and a member of the ASME committee. 
"If they're trying to make it look like editorial, putting a label on it doesn't help too much." 

   The debate over advertorials is likely to continue as advertisers exploit what has become a buyers' market. 
And many in the industry believe that publishers, in their passion to boost revenues, will be increasingly accommodating to advertisers. 
Says Michael Ephron, a media consultant: "Publishers now say, `Shut up and do your job' to the editors, because times are so tough and the bottom line is so hard." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
