ID: 218	RANK: 71	SCORE: 9.062531
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880212-0024 </DOCNO>
<HL> SHOP TALK </HL>
<AUTHOR> William Mathewson </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> PA LT </CO>
<IN> PUB </IN>
<TEXT>
      Gee, Boss, I Couldn't
   Find the Hertz Receipt
   SMITH BARNEY, Harris Upham &amp; Co. lost $43 million in last October's stock-market crash. 
That's enough to make any firm cranky. 

   So last month Smith Barney, a unit of Primerica Corp., declared a tough new expense-account policy; it included a 25% cut in reimbursement for expenses submitted more than 60 days after they were incurred. 
It superseded a policy that had also penalized latecomers but that had allowed for managers' discretion; no such discretion was now allowed. 
And that was enough to make affected employees very cranky. 

   Reportedly, nobody was more out of sorts over the new discount policy than officials in Smith Barney's corporate-finance department. 
There, it seems, many expense accounts were already well-overdue. 
Anguished cries asked: Doesn't anybody have a heart? 

   Someone did. 
A week after the new policy was announced, help for the laggards arrived from the office of corporate-finance department head Robert H. Hotz. 
In a memo, Mr. Hotz told his employees that, by special permission of the accounting department, they had until today, Feb. 12, to submit all old expenses. 
But after Feb. 12, the memo said, the 25% cut would apply. 
The heading on Mr. Hotz's memo: "AMNESTY/25% REDUCTION." 

   A Three-Bedroom Cape
   With Playroom, It Isn't
   FOR SALE: a former convent in Columbus, Ohio; 21 rooms, including a pink-and-beige marble kitchen, a library and a video-projection room; $2.8 million; owner has already moved. 

   The seller is Robert Morosky, the new president of Campeau Corp.'s Allied Department Stores, who recently relocated to New York from Columbus. 
The buyer has yet to appear. 

   The Morosky house bears a price tag that's steep by Columbus standards, where only about 3% of homes sell for over $400,000. 
But Mr. Morosky considers it a bargain. 
"The house contains well in excess of the $2.8 million we're asking," he says. 

   Mr. Morosky bought the convent, which had housed a cloistered order of Carmelites, in 1983. 
He paid about $600,000 and spent two years renovating it. 
What had been an austere chapel now is a grandly proportioned living room with floor-to-ceiling windows and two chandeliers, while dozens of closet-sized nuns' bedrooms have become expansive suites. 

   Still, none of the seven prospective buyers who have seen the house since it went on the market in December have yet submitted a winning bid. 

   Meanwhile, Mr. Morosky, who has been renting a Manhattan apartment, is trying to adjust to considerably more cramped living space. 
"He and his wife considered moving the house with them -- until they found out it would cost $10 million and take two years," says Sarah Simpson, a Columbus real-estate agent. 

   Thanks Awfully, Peter;
   Don't Mention It, Peter
   AVENUE IS a controlled-circulation magazine distributed to some of New York City's toniest addresses. 
Its chairman is Peter O. Price. 

   In Avenue's February issue is a nine-page feature called "The Great Developers," which is described as "a special section prepared by the promotion department of Avenue magazine." 
Among the five developers deemed great by Avenue is Peter S. Kalikow. 

   Says Avenue's promotion department of Mr. Kalikow: "His keen oversight has resulted in his projects being completed on time and within budget." 
And this: "The Peter Kalikow touch assures both quality development and quality management." 
And this: "Peter Kalikow has risen to the challenge of providing state of the art buildings that are architecturally superior." 

   What Avenue doesn't mention is Peter Kalikow's offer to buy the New York Post from Rupert Murdoch. 
Nor does it mention that if the Post transaction should occur (it depends on extensive union concessions), Mr. Kalikow plans to name as the newspaper's publisher none other than Avenue magazine's own Peter O. Price. 

   An Avenue spokesman says that each of the developers paid about $15,000 for inclusion in the "advertorial." 
He adds that the section was "prepared well in advance" of Mr. Kalikow's plans to name Mr. Price publisher of the Post and calls the two matters "clearly a coincidence." 

   He Looks the Part;
   Can He Read Lines? 

   FROM THE COMPANY that brings you "Dallas" and "Knots Landing" and other prime-time TV fare -- "Trump Tower." 

   "Trump Tower"? 
Well, maybe. 
This much is known: Donald Trump has been discussing a television show with Merv Adelson, chairman of Lorimar-Telepictures Inc. Whether the show would be about Trump Tower, the Fifth Avenue crown jewel of Mr. Trump's real-estate empire, or Donald Trump, or some combination thereof, isn't known. 

   Nor is it possible to determine, as some stories have it, that Mr. Trump might like to have a part in the show, playing himself. (He has had experience in playing Donald Trump, having appeared as himself in the televised adaptation of Judith Krantz's novel, "I'll Take Manhattan.") 

   Neither party to the discussion will provide any details. 
An aide to Mr. Trump, who is now busily promoting his best-selling book, "Trump: The Art of the Deal," says that her boss gets a lot of TV proposals. 
She plays down the significance of talks concerning a Trump-related TV series. 
But she does acknowledge that "all of it is under active consideration." 

   At Lorimar, a spokeswoman says: "Donald mentioned a TV idea to Merv at the fights the other night." 
But Lorimar, she adds, isn't planning to take the idea and rush into production. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
