ID: 218	RANK: 82	SCORE: 8.777357
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880217-0069 </DOCNO>
<HL> New York Tabloids Will Scavenge For Readers, Ads if the Post Folds </HL>
<AUTHOR> Johnnie L. Roberts (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> TMC TRB LABOR NWS </CO>
<IN> TNM PUB </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   If Rupert Murdoch closes the New York Post on Friday, this city's tabloid war seems certain to sharpen but there may be few spoils to fight over. 

   The Post's major rivals, the Daily News and New York Newsday, plan to pursue the Post's daily circulation of about 500,000 if the paper doesn't survive. 
But many Post readers already are buying at least one other New York paper, and some media specialists predict that many people who now buy the Post exclusively would choose to get all their news from television. 

   Even if the Daily News and New York Newsday can draw new readers, advertisers probably would be slow to reward the two papers with much new business. 

   Mr. Murdoch, chairman of News Corp., has vowed to close the Post Friday if workers don't agree to $24 million in givebacks wanted by a proposed buyer, developer Peter S. Kalikow. 
The workers are resisting Mr. Murdoch's demands and have been trying to find another buyer. 
Aides of Mr. Murdoch and union officials are scheduled to begin around-the-clock meetings today in a bid to avert the closing of the paper. 
A meeting Monday failed to appreciably narrow their differences. 

   If the Post does close, both the Daily News and Newsday plan to increase their production runs. 
New York Newsday also is considering publishing an afternoon edition even though the Daily News' attempt several years ago at such an edition ended in a multimillion-dollar failure. 
James Hoge, publisher of the Daily News, won't comment on whether the paper is considering another stab at an afternoon edition. 

   The two tabloids also have drawn up lists of star-quality Post staffers and are expected to compete for them, according to gossip at the Lion's Head, this city's watering hole for the working press. 
Insiders say New York Newsday is wooing "Suzy," the Post's society columnist. 

   Media analysts here pick the Daily News (circulation: 1.3 million), which is owned by Chicago-based Tribune Co., to outdraw New York Newsday (circulation: 139,000, excluding Long Island circulation). 
In look and focus, the Daily News is more like the feisty and sensationalist Post than New York Newsday, launched five years ago by Times Mirror Co.'s Long Island-based Newsday. 
Both papers have had losses in recent years, although Mr. Hoge predicts the Daily News will turn a profit this year because of cost cutting. 

   In the past, Newsday has worried that the Post's death would relieve pressure on the Daily News and make it more difficult for Newsday to continue its push into the city. 
But Newsday publisher Robert M. Johnson says recent declines in the Post's circulation and advertising mean its closure would no longer help the Daily News at the expense of Newsday. 

   In any case, both papers' efforts could be in vain because a portion of the Post's readership probably would abandon newspapers altogether, analysts and others predict. 
"No one totally picks up the circulation" of a defunct newspaper, says Richard J. Blood, an assistant professor at Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism. 
"It disappears in the ether." 

   Mr. Blood and other media analysts note that many readers of major afternoon dailies that have folded in the last decade, notably the Washington Star and Philadelphia Bulletin, apparently stopped reading a local newspaper. 

   Many Post buyers are older, blue-collar, subway-riding readers, a group that observers predict would turn exclusively to television news. 
Others read the Post for specific reasons, and the News and Newsday might not meet their needs. 
For example, middle-class suburbanites scan the afternoon edition for the latest stock prices. 

   Much more troublesome, however, is duplication -- readers who already buy two or more papers. 
Exact figures on duplication aren't available, but John Polich, associate director for research and technologies studies at Gannett Center for Media Studies, an offspring of the Gannett Foundation, estimates the Post's readership "is virtually all duplicated by the New York Times and/or the Daily News." 

   Even if the Daily News and New York Newsday successfully attract Post readers, advertisers are unlikely to follow. 
The Post has been drawing skimpy advertising for years, with 1987 ad revenue in the range of $50 million. 
Advertisers believe they already reach the Post readers through other newspapers or radio and television. 
By comparison, Daily News advertising revenue totaled more than $400 million last year. 
"There has been no incremental value to advertisers who buy the Post," says Gannett's Mr. Polich. 

   Mr. Hoge of the Daily News says that because the same display advertisements already appear in the Daily News and the Post, he doesn't expect to see an increase in such advertising if the Post folds. 
In the last four years, he says, most of the classified advertising for tabloids in New York has shifted from the Post to the Daily News. 

   Whatever the outcome, the Daily News and New York Newsday don't have to worry that the New York Times will aggressively compete for Post readers. 
"I don't know anything about the Post readers," says Max Frankel, executive editor. 
"But I can't imagine there is a Post reader that doesn't know about the New York Times." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
