ID: 218	RANK: 88	SCORE: 8.525468
<DOC>
<DOCNO> AP900130-0006 </DOCNO>
<FILEID>AP-NR-01-30-90 0041EST</FILEID>
<FIRST>r a PM-PulitzerJurors     01-30 0936</FIRST>
<SECOND>PM-Pulitzer Jurors,0956</SECOND>
<HEAD>Jurors Named for 1990 Pulitzer Prizes</HEAD>
<NOTE>Eds: Also in Tuesday AMs report.</NOTE>
<DATELINE>NEW YORK (AP) </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Sixty-five people have been named to serve on
nominating juries for the 1990 Pulitzer Prizes, which will be
announced April 12.
   The jurors will be assigned to panels that will screen entries
in the 14 Pulitzer categories in journalism: public service,
general news reporting, investigative reporting, explanatory
journalism, specialized reporting, national reporting,
international reporting, feature writing, commentary, criticism,
editorial writing, editorial cartooning, spot news photography and
feature photography.
   Each jury will submit three nominations to the Pulitzer Prize
Board, which will select the winners.
   The member of the nominating juries are:
   Leroy F. Aarons, senior vice president-news, The Tribune,
Oakland, Calif.; William E. Ahearn, executive editor, The
Associated Press; Jane Amsterdam, former editor, New York Post;
David J. Anable, chairman, Boston University School of Journalism;
Jacqui Banaszynski, special projects reporter and feature writer,
St. Paul (Minn.) Pioneer Press Dispatch.
   Andrew Barnes, editor, president and chief executive officer,
St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times; Dave Barry, columnist, The Miami
Herald; Lawrence K. Beaupre, executive editor-vice president,
Westchester Rockland Newspapers, Inc., White Plains, N.Y.; Creed C.
Black, president, Knight Foundation, Akron, Ohio; Walt Bogdanich,
special writer, The Wall Street Journal.
   Judith W. Brown, editor and publisher, The Herald, New Britain,
Conn.; J. Taylor Buckley, senior editor, USA Today; Jennie Buckner,
vice president-news, Knight-Ridder, Inc., Miami, Fla.; Benjamin J.
Burns, editor and publisher, The Macomb Daily-The Daily
Tribune-Adams Newspapers, Mount Clemens, Mich.; Manny Crisostomo,
special projects photographer, Detroit Free Press.
   Allan W. Cromley, senior correspondent, Washington bureau, The
Daily Oklahoman, Oklahoma City; Bill Dedman, staff writer, The
Washington Post; Frank del Olmo, deputy editor of the editorial
pages, Los Angeles Times; Leonard Downie Jr., managing editor, The
Washington Post; John S. Driscoll, editor, The Boston Globe.
   Jonathan Freedman, editorial writer, The Tribune, San Diego;
Thomas L. Friedman, chief diplomatic correspondent, The New York
Times; Manuel Galvan, editorial board member, Chicago Tribune;
William German, executive editor, San Francisco Chronicle; Robert
J. Haiman, president, The Poynter Institute, St. Petersburg, Fla.
   David Hall, editor-vice president, The Record, Hackensack, N.J.;
David Hanners, projects reporter-state desk, The Dallas Morning
News; David V. Hawpe, editor, The Courier-Journal, Louisville, Ky.;
Stephen Hess, senior fellow, The Brookings Institution, Washington;
William Hilliard, editor, The Oregonian, Portland, Ore.
   Al Johnson, vice president and executive editor, Post-Tribune,
Gary, Ind.; Pamela J. Johnson, managing editor, The Phoenix
Gazette; Pam McAllister Johnson, publisher, The Ithaca (N.Y.)
Journal; Tonnie Katz, managing editor, The Orange County (Calif.)
Register; William B. Ketter, vice president and editor, The Patriot
Ledger, Quincy, Mass.
   James M. Klurfeld, editor of editorial pages, Newsday, Melville,
N.Y.; David Kraslow, vice president, Cox Newspapers, Miami; Richard
H. Leonard, professor, Marquette University Department of
Journalism; Murray B. Light, editor and senior vice president, The
Buffalo News; Steve Lovelady, associate executive editor, The
Philadelphia Inquirer.
   Ron Martin, editor, Atlanta Journal-Constitution; Robert
McGruder, managing editor-news, Detroit Free Press; David Medina,
former newspaper editor, cable access coordinator, office of the
Bronx borough president, New York City; Michael Pakenham, editorial
page editor, Daily News in New York; Christopher Peck, managing
editor, The Spokesman-Review &amp; Spokane Chronicle, Spokane, Wash.
   Rena Pederson, vice president-editor, editorial page, The Dallas
Morning News; Marty Petty, vice president-associate publisher, The
Hartford (Conn.) Courant; Robert W. Ritter, general news executive,
Gannett Co. Inc.; Madelyn A. Ross, managing editor, The Pittsburgh
Press; Andrew Schneider, reporter, The Pittsburgh Press and Scripps
Howard News Service.
   John Siegenthaler, chairman, publisher and chief executive
officer, The Tennessean, Nashville, Tenn., and editorial director,
USA Today; Edward K. Shanahan, managing editor, The Register
Citizen, Torrington, Conn.; Charles Shepard, reporter, The
Charlotte (N.C.) Observer; Norma J. Sosa, former managing editor,
Corpus Christi (Texas) Caller-Times; Ernie Sotomayer, assistant
metro editor, New York Newsday.
   Joseph R. L. Sterne, editor, editorial pages, The Sun in
Baltimore; Matthew V. Storin, managing editor, Daily News in New
York; Frank Sutherland, editor, The Tennessean; Jim Tharpe,
managing editor, The Alabama Journal, Montgomery, Ala.; Helen
Thomas, White House bureau chief-reporter, United Press
International.
   Richard J. Wesnick, editor, The Billings (Mont.) Gazette; Robert
H. Wills, editor-senior vice president, The Milwaukee Sentinel;
Rhea Wilson, associate editor, McClatchy Newspapers, Sacramento,
Calif.; David R. Witke, executive sports editor, The Des Moines
(Iowa) Register; William F. Woo, editor, St. Louis Post-Dispatch.
   The members of the Pulitzer Prize Board include Columbia
University President Michael I. Sovern; Joan Konner, dea, Columbia
University Graduate School of Journalism; Russell Baker, columnist,
The New York Times; Sissela Bok, associate professor, Brandeis
University; Michael Gartner, president, NBC News and editor, The
Daily Tribune, Ames, Iowa; Meg Greenfield, editorial page editor,
The Washington Post; James F. Hoge Jr., publisher, Daily News in
New York; Peter R. Kann, publisher, The Wall Street Journal; David
A. Laventhol, president, Times Mirror Co., and publisher and chief
executive officer, Los Angeles Times; Robert C. Maynard, editor and
publisher, The Tribune, Oakland, Calif.;
   Burl Osborne, president and editor, The Dallas Morning News;
Geneva Overholser, editor, The Des Moines Register; James V.
Risser, director, John S. Knight Fellowships, Stanford University;
Eugene L. Roberts Jr., chairman of the Pulitzer Board and executive
editor and president, The Philadelphia Inquirer; Walter Rugaber,
president and publisher, Roanoke (Va.) Times &amp; World-News;
Charlotte Saikowski, former chief of Washington bureau, The
Christian Science Monitor; Claude F. Sitton, editorial director and
vice president, The News and Observer, Raleigh, N.C.; Robert C.
Christopher, secretary of the board.
</TEXT>
<TEXT>
   The deadline for submissions for the competition is Feb. 1.
Inquiries, entries and exhibits should be addressed to Robert C.
Christopher at 702 Journalism Building, Columbia University, New
York, N.Y. 10027. A $20 handling fee must accompany each entry.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
