ID: 208	RANK: 10	SCORE: 7.972351
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880114-0084 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Glasgow's No Mean City Anymore </HL>
<AUTHOR> Terry Trucco </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Glasgow, Scotland  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   As a city official tells it, the worst thing that ever happened to Glasgow was when a pair of local boys made good and wrote a best-selling novel some 50 years ago. 
The book, "No Mean City," was set in Gorbals, Glasgow's South Bronx, where everyone, it seems, lived in stinking tenements and brandished straight-edge razors, slashing each other when things got dull. 

   These days, no one lives in Gorbals, which looks like a vast, deserted parking lot. 
But the memory lingers. 
"These guys write this bloody book and convince the entire Western world that Glasgow is full of razor gangs," the official sighs. 

   What's a city to do? 
In Glasgow's case, convince the entire Western world that it's full of culture. 

   Glasgow isn't Belfast, but it's not exactly the first British city you think of in connection with high culture. 
Yet a few months back, Glasgow stunned much of Britain by getting itself chosen as European City of Culture for 1990. 

   True, a lot of people have never heard of the European City of Culture award, which was launched in 1984 through efforts by actress Melina Mercouri, Greece's cultural minister at the time. 
But European Community countries, which each year submit nominations for the prize, regard it as a high honor capable of boosting civic morale and, more important, tourism. 
To date, winners have included Amsterdam, Florence and, the initial recipient, Athens (surprise, surprise), with Berlin and Paris on tap for '88 and '89 respectively. 

   Glasgow officials, a realistic, down-to-earth bunch, admit that their city is the wild card in that lineup. 
But they're determined to demonstrate the selection was no fluke. 
If the city fathers have their way, the award and accompanying blizzard of trimmings (concerts, art shows, building refurbishments, even a new symphony hall) will have an effect similar to that of those international cultural expositions in the 19th century. 
"If 1990 doesn't leave a permanent impact on the city, it won't have achieved its objective," says Robert Palmer, head of the festivities. 

   Glasgow does deserve a celebration, perhaps less for its culture than its amazing resurrection. 
Britain's north is studded with industrial dinosaurs like Liverpool, Manchester and Newcastle, which were hit hard by heavy industry's decline. 
For years, Glasgow was leader of the pack, with more blight, more filth, more unemployment. 
Its postwar architecture was less than thrilling; dozens of lovely old Victorians were uprooted for a sprawling freeway. 
More bulldozing was planned. 

   Then, in 1968, a violent storm hit Glasgow, rendering those "No Mean City"-style tenements uninhabitable. 
"We think of that storm as divine intervention," chuckles a city official. 
Glasgow planned to knock down the tenements and build concrete high-rises, but with people homeless, there wasn't time. 
So they were rehabilitated, with new roofs, new interiors and sandblasts for their sooty walls. 

   That effectively ended Glasgow's flirtation with East German architecture. 
In the post-storm years, dozens of wonderful old buildings got facelifts and, along the way, Glasgow not only cleaned up its act, it became a leader in British gentrification. 
It now boasts more than 800 listed buildings, including its magnificent City Chambers, a breathtaking ode to high Victorian excess, with vast domed ceilings, countless carved fireplaces and, according to local lore, more marble than the Vatican. 
A major campaign to scrub down the city's blackened buildings should be finished by 1990. 
And with industrial pollution gone, they should stay pale and pretty for years. 

   But Glasgow's self-esteem hit its 20th-century height in 1983, with the opening of the Burrell Collection, a splendid art-through-the-ages museum. 
Housed in a big, airy building, it's one of the few British museums in which the setting is as intriguing as the contents. 
Nearly everything, from the Tang horses to the Degas pastels, was collected by William Burrell, a rather dour Glaswegian shipowner with an eye for beauty and a buy. (He liked big 15th-century European tapestries because, as he put it, you get your money's worth.) 

   The Burrell Collection convinced boosters here that Glasgow had a great untapped potential -- tourism. 
Plenty of locals still consider this a big joke. 
"Who the hell wants to come to Glasgow?" muses a cab driver as we head for the train station in pouring rain. 
But Glasgow is surprisingly well equipped for cultural tourists, the ones who revel in history and get heart palpitations at the sight of vintage buildings. 
Though all the rough spots haven't been smoothed yet, the city's already had sufficient success to serve as a model for Liverpool, Newcastle and those other northerners rich in little but the past. 

   Of the bunch, Glasgow is the pearl. 
Architecturally, it is to the Victorian era what Bath is to the Georgian. 
Though it isn't a thrilling walking city, within a few blocks of the City Chambers are enough old Victorians to leave the stroller gaping, dizzy in a forest of turrets, ironwork and, best of all, stained glass (ever so convenient for blotting out urban blight). 

   Glasgow was also home to Charles Rennie Mackintosh, that inspired turn-of-the-century architect who shocked sober Victorians with mischievous grace notes such as bright green doors and eerily elongated lines. 
His most enduring design is probably the Glasgow School of Art, his alma mater, which manages to be both impish and pragmatic. 
A short hop from those rococo temples of Victoriana, it stands in quiet dignity on a hilltop, the first modern building in the land. 

   There's plenty more, from the Hunterian Museum with its huge collection of Whistlers (a highlight is a collage of his paintbrushes) to Miss Toward's tenement house, with its gaslights and closet bed. 
One of the nicest things is that you can stroll through a museum or ogle a building in peace; there's never a crowd. 
The big 1990 festivities may change all that. 
Glasgow could certainly use the attention. 
But it's not such a bad place right now. 

   ---
   Ms. Trucco is a free-lance writer based in London. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
