ID: 222	RANK: 16	SCORE: 12.028559
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870430-0075 </DOCNO>
<HL> Modern Morality Play: 'Everyman' in a Test Tube
---
By Vermont Royster</HL>
<DD> 04/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Anthropologists are uncertain when our primitive ancestors learned the role of the male in reproduction. 
In the earliest human groups, says Will Durant in his "The Story of Civilization," "the physiological role of the male . . . escaped notice as completely as among animals." 
But when people finally saw the connection between the sexual act and a birth many months later, the discovery launched a profound social revolution. 

   Until then primitive society was basically feminist. 
The female alone seemed responsible for the child growing inside her, for some mysterious reason, and she alone was responsible for the continuation of the species. 
That gave her a preeminent position. 
The male's role, while important, was limited to the hunter and nurturer of the woman and her offspring. 
Kinship was recognized only through the female. 
The gods worshipped were all female. 

   But once the mystery of birth was unlocked, all changed. 
Gone were casual sexual relationships. 
To be sure of their children, men began to restrict the lives of women, at first with rigidly controlled polygamy and ultimately with monogamy. 
The chief gods became bearded males. 
The subjugation of women had begun. 

   Today we seem to be in the midst of another reproductive revolution likely also to have profound if unknown social consequences. 

   It began with "the pill," which freed women from the burden of constant child bearing. 
That started the sexual revolution, with its breakdown of old mores. 
It is not unusual today for women to bear children openly without marriage, often children of unknown fathers. 

   But this was only the beginning of the way technology is making a revolution. 
Today, women can and do have children using sperm from artificial insemination. 

   From this has come the growing prevalence of "surrogate mothers." 
In this practice a woman rents her body to be inseminated by an absent man, and brings the child to term for another woman who cannot or doesn't wish to bear her own. 

   This has given us the controversial case of "Baby M." 
Here a Mrs. Whitehead agreed for $10,000 to accept the sperm of William Stern, bear the child and then give the child to the Sterns to raise as their own. 
But once the child was born, old and deep maternal feelings took hold of Mrs. Whitehead and she refused to give up her child. 

   The result was a lawsuit brought by the Sterns alleging breach of contract, and the trial judge in New Jersey ruled that the law of contracts did apply. 
Mrs. Whitehead had agreed, accepted her fee and must live up to the agreement. 
The judge also held that Mrs. Whitehead was not the best mother to rear the child and that Baby M should be raised by Mrs. Stern, who had nothing to do with the nine-month nourishing of the unborn child. 

   We have not heard the last of this case, of course. 
It will be appealed and higher courts may rule otherwise. 
Meanwhile, legislatures are grappling with what to do, if anything, about both the legal and moral questions so dramatically presented. 

   Under older mores Baby M would be considered illegitimate since her father (in absentia) and her mother were not married, but that has hardly been mentioned in the resultant controversy because illegitimacy is no longer a social stigma. 
So much for older mores. 

   But the Baby M case is only the beginning of both the technological and social revolutions. 
Male sperm can now be preserved almost indefinitely, so it is possible for a woman to bear a child fathered by a man long dead. 
And it will not be long before the eggs of females can be removed and preserved as well. 

   We have then the possibility of conception without copulation, of children born not from acts of love or passion but from the ministrations of technicians in a laboratory. 
And it's hardly surprising this brings much public debate about the social, political and moral issues it raises. 

   Following the debate makes me feel I am watching a modern morality play unfold. 
Those popular plays in the 15th century, such as "Everyman," revolved around the clash of good and evil. 
The characters in them had names but they were intended as symbols to illustrate moral issues. 
Usually, but not always, good won over evil; either way the plays were designed to teach dramatically the moral questions of the time. 

   Today, Baby M is a real person, as are her unrelated parents, but all are also symbols for new moral questions. 
Nobody really knows how many surrogate mothers have played their role to bring forth other Baby Ms to perturb us with questions of social policy. 

   Nor is this necessarily the end of questions to plague us. 
In time, science may bring us to the situation imagined by Aldous Huxley in his "Brave New World." 
That is, embryos nurtured not in a woman's body but in incubators row on row, with parents unknown of either sex. 

   Even as it is, we've learned that sex can be removed from propagation; all that is necessary is a laboratory with people in white coats. 
What that portends for the Baby Ms grown to adulthood no one knows. 
What will be their feelings when they come to know how they came to be? 
What ties will bind them to a father who was only a sperm in a test tube or to a mother who was only briefly a rented body? 
To which one, if either, does the child belong? 

   And what will this do to the relationship between women and men, to the institution of marriage and family, already diminished in social importance? 
Will we, like the Cro-Magnons, come to think of sex as no more than a casual matter since it is of no importance to continuing the species? 

   I do not know how this modern morality play will end, how we will resolve the current issue of surrogate mothers or how much farther technology will take us in divorcing sex from reproduction. 

   I can see that if the miracle of birth becomes merely a matter of matching sperm and egg in a test tube, the social revolution will be as far-reaching as the one wrought long ago among our primitive ancestors. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
