ID: 222	RANK: 95	SCORE: 6.695151
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880803-0141 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Voodoo Part II: Return of the Zombies </HL>
<AUTHOR> Edward Dolnick </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Wade Davis is the author of a rapturously reviewed 1985 book, "The Serpent and the Rainbow," on zombies and Haitian voodoo. 
In it, Mr. Davis recounted his startling discoveries about Haitian zombies: Voodoo priests sometimes concoct a powder that renders its victims temporarily paralyzed and seemingly dead, though in fact they never lose consciousness. 
Buried alive, the victims are released from their coffins by the voodoo priests after some six to 12 hours, force-fed a delirium-inducing hallucinogen, and condemned to slavery. 
These "living dead" are glassy-eyed and docile, devoid of will, memory and emotion -- in short, zombies. 

   That was Mr. Davis's story, and he told it in rollicking, fast-paced style. 
Perhaps one reviewer somewhere neglected to compare Mr. Davis with Indiana Jones. 
Mr. Davis's new work, "Passage of Darkness" (University of North Carolina Press, 344 pages, $29.95) is based more closely on the text of his doctoral dissertation on the same subject, and it aims to fill in the scientific details that were left out of his other, swashbuckling effort. 

   But the new book reads like a sequel and, like most sequels, it falls short of the original. 

   The writing is far inferior, repetitious and laden with academic jargon. 
Mr. Davis calls a group "polycephalous," to indicate that it has many leaders. 
He writes that he has "clarified the emic/etic confusion" without telling us what that might be. 
He says that peasant societies are not "diachronically stable," apparently meaning that they change. 

   The heavy, clanking style is perhaps unavoidable in a book written largely for an academic audience. 
A more serious drawback is that Mr. Davis has failed to update the argument he made three years ago in "The Serpent and the Rainbow," while barely acknowledging that he has come under severe attack from academic colleagues in the meantime. 

   Those critics have dealt harshly only with the zombie parts of Mr. Davis's earlier book. 
Long, impressive chapters on Haitian history and the influence of voodooism throughout Haitian society have gone largely unchallenged. 
Indeed, the implicit message of the scientific criticism is that Mr. Davis's anthropological findings were so dazzling that his toxicological arguments were initially taken on faith. 

   The dispute turns on tetrodotoxin, puffer fish poison. 
By hook or crook -- and cash -- Mr. Davis found that zombie powders are concoctions of ground and roasted toads, lizards, tarantulas, snakes, plants, human remains and puffer fish. 
Tetrodotoxin proved to be the key, and in the book's strongest sections, Mr. Davis lays out the circumstantial evidence implicating it. 

   First, voodoo priests indisputably use toxic species of puffer fish in preparing their powders. 
Second, the symptoms are right. 
At the proper dosage, tetrodotoxin induces paralysis and an apparent unconsciousness that can be mistaken for death. 
"I tried to move and talk but that was impossible," recalled an Australian boy in 1973, after he fell ill from eating puffer fish. 
"It was terrible because (the doctors) opened my eyelids every now and then and I found out I could see but just couldn't open my lids." 

   Mr. Davis found that case, and several others, documented in the medical literature. 
In Japan, in 1983, a man poisoned by eating puffer fish recovered after he had been nailed into his coffin. 

   Those arguments appear in both of Mr. Davis's books. 
The problem is that, since he wrote his first book, Mr. Davis has sent his zombie powders to various laboratories to be analyzed, and the results have been a muddle. 

   In only one of Mr. Davis's eight samples has anyone found tetrodotoxin, and the analyses of that single sample have varied wildly. 
To hear the critics tell it, Mr. Davis has glossed over or ignored experiments that undercut his theory and overstated the importance of preliminary findings that seem to bear him out. 
The expert whom Mr. Davis calls "perhaps the best single authority on puffer fish poisoning" accuses Mr. Davis of "fraud," the most serious charge in the scientist's vocabulary. 

   Mr. Davis's response, essentially that voodoo poison-makers do not operate with the precision of pharmaceutical scientists, is surprisingly muffled and brief. 
That is a serious mistake, because "Passage of Darkness" is the proper forum for Mr. Davis to make his best case. 

   Thomas Huxley said once that tragedy in science is "the slaying of a beautiful hypothesis by an ugly fact." 
Mr. Davis's critics would have us believe that his zombie hypothesis has been slain by the fact that tetrodotoxin has turned up missing. 
I don't believe that's so -- bits and pieces in "Passage of Darkness" convince me that Mr. Davis could have won the argument, if he had chosen to fight. 

   ---
   Mr. Dolnick writes about science from Chevy Chase, Md. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
