ID: 126	RANK: 28	SCORE: 13.681794
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880209-0011 </DOCNO>
<HL> World Oil Reserves Rose 27% in Year As Producer Nations Boosted Estimates </HL>
<AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> MDEST </CO>
<IN> PET MON </IN>
<TEXT>
   The world oil glut has suddenly got bigger, postponing the day of any severe shortages into the next century. 

   Based on authoritative new estimates, proved international oil reserves increased spectacularly within the past year -- as much as 190 billion barrels, or 27%, despite the drilling downturn. 
That's enough new oil to satisfy global needs for an additional nine years, based on current use of 20 billion barrels annually. 

   Such a surge makes it "difficult to argue that running out of oil should be mankind's principal concern," says Barry C. Good, an oil analyst who is a managing director of Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. 

   But even though the supply increases puncture the widely held theory that the world is using up oil reserves faster than they are being replaced, not all oil countries share in the petroleum bonanza. 
Most notably in the U.S., still the world's biggest oil consumer, reserves and production have dropped since the oil-price collapse of two years ago. 
This underscores the worsening regional imbalance of oil supplies and further solidifies the hold that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is expected to have on oil markets. 
Most of the reserves gains were recorded in six of the 13 countries that make up OPEC, chiefly the Middle East members and Venezuela. 

   "It's not the quantity of oil out there that is the problem -- it's the distribution," says Charles D. Masters, chief of the world energy resources program of the U.S. Geological Survey. 

   Mr. Masters and some of his associates were among the early dissenters from the consensus that world oil reserves had remained flat at around 700 billion barrels since 1984. 
A study they presented at last April's World Petroleum Congress in Houston concluded that proved oil reserves should be revised upward to 795 billion barrels. 

   Recently, publications of record for world oil reserves also have begun raising their estimates. 
Houston-based World Oil expects in August to raise its 1987 world reserve estimates 5% above the 1986 estimate of 716.94 billion barrels. 
The London-based Petroleum Economist recently estimated that world reserves, excluding the Communist countries, totaled 774.2 billion barrels for year-end 1986. 
That was up 100 billion barrels from the Economist's year-earlier estimate. 
OPEC accounted for the gains. 

   Now, the Oil &amp; Gas Journal, an industry publication whose world-wide figures are closely watched by oil companies and producer governments, places total reserves at the beginning of this year at 887.35 billion barrels. 
That's a record 190-billion-barrel leap from the 697.45 billion barrels estimated at Jan. 1, 1987. 

   Annually, this Tulsa, Okla. publication surveys the producing nations and then bases its assessment of world reserves on official reports. 
Editors say they confirm the government data with a variety of other sources, including oil companies operating in the countries and, if possible, with geologists familiar with individual fields. 

   Although leading geologists endorse these higher reserve statistics, differences of opinion exist as to how much oil can be economically recovered from known fields. 
Politics further complicates the estimating problem. 
Proved reserves generally are defined as those that can be economically produced with current technology at today's prices. 
So when prices dropped and drilling slumped from the 1986 oil crash, it was commonly assumed reserves would fall, too. 

   The sharply higher reserve estimates now being circulated don't, in fact, reflect much newly discovered oil. 
Few big new oil fields are being found -- even in OPEC. 
The increases are due mainly to recent official revisions by producing countries. 

   "Increases of this magnitude cannot be the result of new discoveries in a period of productive capacity surpluses, unstable crude oil prices and depressed drilling," says the Oil &amp; Gas Journal. 
"Instead, they reflect new estimates of the fruits of past exploratory efforts, based on revisions by the countries themselves or on information not previously available." 

   Venezuela led the way in increasing its reserve estimates in late 1986, doubling its projection to more than 56 billion barrels. 
The revision included not only new finds but also incorporated some Orinoco heavy oil-crudes so dense they are difficult to transport and refine. 

   Five other OPEC members around the Persian Gulf, including warring Iraq and Iran, have raised their official reserves data. 
Abu Dhabi, for example, tripled its estimate to 92.2 billion barrels, nearly four times the 25.26 billion barrels estimated for the U.S. 

   Industry publications of record initially were skeptical of some of the new claims, knowing that Mexico, for instance, had once pumped up its reserves officially to increase bank borrowings. 
Only now, a year later, has the Oil &amp; Gas Journal finally recognized Venezuela's higher figures. 
But one editor says he still has trouble with Iran's doubling to 92.85 billion barrels, even though the government's letter certifying the new figures "came from the highest authority -- in the name of God." 

   Still, except possibly for Iran, there is evidence to support the government revisions. 
Indeed, it's suspected that some Persian Gulf OPEC members still may be understating their reserves, especially Saudi Arabia. 
Officially, the kingdom's reserves have remained slightly under 167 billion barrels, 19% of the world total, for several years. 
Industry officials suggest a figure twice as large. 

   ---

              Oil Reserves: The Rich Get Richer
                   Estimated Proved Reserves
                   (In billions of barrels)
    REGION              JAN. 1, 1987     JAN. 1, 1988
    Asia-Pacific           19.024           19.354
    Western Europe         21.938           22.448
    Middle East           401.879          564.680
    Africa                 55.194           55.250
    W. Hemisphere         120.165          146.417
    Communist areas        79.250           79.200
    TOTAL WORLD           697.450          887.348
   Source: Oil &amp; Gas Journal

</TEXT>
</DOC>
