ID: 126	RANK: 4	SCORE: 22.575165
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870501-0147 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Begins to Take Notice as Venezuela
Lifts Its Estimates of Proven Oil Reserves
---
By James Tanner
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LATAM MDEST
PETROLEUM (PET)
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Venezuela is finally getting some attention from Washington in its long-running campaign to sell more oil in the U.S. 

   U.S. energy officials have begun mentioning that Venezuela is one of the biggest suppliers of oil to this country, although none are yet suggesting than Venezuelan oil imports be increased. 
And U.S. geological teams were recently in Venezuela to confirm the South American country's sharp upward revisions in its estimates of proven oil reserves. 

   Venezuelan oil officials still worry, nonetheless, that the U.S. might enact an oil-import tax. 
And they question whether Venezuela's petroleum-producing potential is recognized in this country. 
They are puzzled by the U.S. focus on the Middle East as the key, but possibly unstable, source for future oil needs while Venezuela's big petroleum reserves are much closer and offer secure supplies. 

   In January, the most recent period for which figures are available, Venezuela ranked No. 2 as an oil exporter to the U.S. with an average of about 850,000 barrels daily, behind Saudi Arabia, with almost 900,000. 
In recent years, Venezuela, Mexico and Canada have been the three largest exporters of oil to the U.S. 

   "There's no question we have more oil than Saudi Arabia," Juan Chacin Guzman, president of Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., said in an interview. 

   Mr. Chacin, in Houston to participate in the World Petroleum Congress, and other officials of Petroleos de Venezuela, the country's national oil company, may be stretching a point in comparing their oil reserves to Saudi Arabia's. 
At the beginning of this year, annual industry calculations generally put Saudi Arabia's proven oil reserves at 167 billion barrels -- still the largest in the world and several times higher than the official 25-billion-barrel estimate for Venezuela's proven reserves. 

   But Venezuela's recent upgrading, which isn't yet reflected in official figures, doubled its own estimates of proven reserves to 55 billion barrels, about twice those of the U.S. 
In addition, Petroleos de Venezuela counts 267 billion barrels of proven reserves of lower-quality extraheavy crude in its Orinoco Oil Belt. 

   Proven reserves are generally defined as those that can be produced with current technology at today's prices. 
According to geological experts from outside Venezuela, Petroleos de Venezuela has followed generally accepted reserves-accounting practices in the recent revisions. 
The revisions include changing semi-proven reserves, a category that isn't any longer used by the industry, to proven reserves. 

   Both Saudi Arabia and Venezuela are founding members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. 
Saudi crudes are lighter and thus more desired for refiners' fuel mix. 
Venezuela, however, is much closer to the U.S., only five days away by oil tanker. 
It has been a steady U.S. supplier for decades, even during the Arab oil embargo. 
Most of its oil exports go to the U.S. 

   But Venezuelan conventional petroleum tends toward the less-desired heavier grades. 
The Orinoco crude is so dense that it is generally typed as nonconventional oil. 
Once pumped it must be kept heated or blended with light fuels to be transported, and many refineries aren't equipped to handle it. 

   Mr. Chacin said facilities are in place in the Orinoco Belt for output of 150,000 barrels a day of the heavy oil. 
Only about a third of that is currently being produced. 
In all, Venezuela is producing around 1.5 million barrels a day of crude oil, about in line with its OPEC quota. 
It also produces 160,000 barrels a day of condensate, a very light oil, and 110,000 barrels a day of gas liquids, neither of which is included in the OPEC quota. 

   This leaves Venezuela with 900,000 barrels a day of unused production capacity, Mr. Chacin said. 
"We could go to four million barrels a day (production)," he said, noting that current capacity is 2.6 million barrels a day. 

   Exploration is mainly for lighter crudes. 
Petroleos de Venezuela's operating subsidiaries recently have made some major finds of the higher-quality lighter oil. 
Those finds aren't yet included in the revised estimates. 

   In its push to open new markets for its oil, Venezuela has been more aggressive than most OPEC members in buying interests in petroleum refineries, particularly in the U.S. 
Among recent investments, as previously reported, were 50% interests in refineries at Lake Charles, La., and Corpus Christi, Tex. 
In the U.S. and Europe, such arrangements currently provide outlets for 500,000 barrels a day of Venezuelan oil, Mr. Chacin said. 
Through additional joint ventures in the U.S. or Europe, he said, Petroleos de Venezuela expects to expand such sales to 700,000 barrels a day. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
