ID: 304	RANK: 14	SCORE: 12.480996
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870630-0119 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Mobile Guide:
Philadelphia Freedom: Constitution Turns 200
---
By Pamela J. Macleod</HL>
<DD> 06/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Philadelphia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The centerpiece of the Constitution bicentennial celebration here is appropriately entitled "Miracle at Philadelphia." 
But the real miracle on the Delaware is that Philadelphians have given us a stimulating, not snooze-inducing, history lesson. 

   Let's face it: The Constitution doesn't have the appeal of that soaring symbol of freedom, the Statue of Liberty, nor does it warm the patriotic heart like the Declaration of Independence. 
But Philadelphia, with this festival, has gone a long way toward elevating the Constitution to its proper place alongside these other American icons. 

   The first big event of the city's yearlong bash -- a jam-packed agenda of happenings collectively billed as "All Roads Lead to Philadelphia" -- marked the anniversary of the opening of the Constitutional Convention on May 25. 
This Fourth of July weekend there'll be a "Freedom Festival," boasting parades, pageants, concerts, fireworks and even a hot-air-balloon race. 
The fireworks continue on "Constitution Day," Sept. 17, commemorating the occasion when 39 delegates put their pens to the parchment in Independence Hall. 
The highlight that day will be the Grand Federal Procession, which will include a recreation of floats from the 1788 parade celebrating the Constitution's ratification. 

   The best of the Constitutional offerings in this historic city, however, can be enjoyed by the visitor any day this year -- and, remarkably, the crowds aren't bad. 
First stop for all should be the Independence National Historical Park Visitor Center (Third and Chestnut Sts.), the handsome modern brick home of "A Promise of Permanency," a new exhibit that illustrates the durability of the Constitution. 

   Video monitors displaying a moving timeline (1789-1986) are set into niches in a large black-and-white montage depicting famous faces and places of the past. 
To hear commentary on a particular Supreme Court justice or case, you just touch the computer screen. 
Nearby terminals broadcast interviews with experts on divisive issues such as the death penalty and pornography. 
By touching the video screen, a viewer can register his or her own opinions -- and find out how they compare with those of earlier visitors. 
There's also a well-made 30-minute film, "Independence," on America from the Revolution through the Constitutional Convention. 

   A block away "Miracle at Philadelphia," at the landmark Second Bank of the U.S. (Fourth and Chestnut, through Dec. 31), offers a comprehensive multimedia account of the controversial convention. 
Five rooms of original documents, works of art, audiovisual presentations and educational models introduce the visitor, for example, to the Constitution's immediate predecessor, the Articles of Confederation. 
By deciphering yellowed letters and reading original newspaper clips he is reminded why Nationalists such as Thomas Jefferson and James Madison pushed for a strong new government: Under the Articles, each state could issue money, levy taxes and regulate trade; Congress didn't have a permanent home or a steady income and was considered weak by Americans and foreigners alike. 

   Once 55 delegates from 12 states did agree to attend the convention, their differences at first seemed only to be exacerbated. 
James Madison's notes on the secret proceedings explain why the negotiations were so difficult. 
The delegates -- representing large and small states, Northern and Southern interests -- bickered over representation in the new government, trade regulation, taxation and slavery -- among other things. 
That they finally agreed on the new document, with its unprecedented call for three separate branches of government and a system of checks and balances, was "little short of a miracle," convention chairman George Washington wrote. 

   A short movie called "The Sound of the Debates" reviews the process of electing a president. 
Also of particular interest are colorful three-dimensional models that use labeled blocks to show the number of representatives each state would have had to the federal government under various proposals -- the Virginia, New Jersey and Connecticut plans. 

   Over at Old City Hall (Fifth and Chestnut, adjacent to Independence Hall), also through Dec. 31, is an original copy of Magna Carta, a precursor to the Constitution. 
The document, drawn up by disgruntled barons in Runnymede, England, and signed by King John in 1215 under threat of civil war, was aimed at curbing royal power and alluded to rights for all subjects. 
This 1297 copy is the only one permanently in the U.S. 
It's on loan from Texas industrialist H. Ross Perot. 

   A 15-minute walk westward from Independence National Historical Park, not far from Philadelphia's modern-day City Hall, brings visitors to a pair of small and informative exhibits. 
"A More Perfect Union: The American People and Their Constitution" at the Historical Society of Pennsylvania (1300 Locust St., through Dec. 14), traces the evolution of the Constitution and public perception of it. 
One original document details the order of participants in the 1788 Grand Procession. 
"Major Pancake, with twelve Axe-men, in frocks and caps" led the march, followed by scores of other citizens, including "whip manufacturers" and "peruke-makers." 
Photos of the 1887 Constitution centennial, depicting high-stepping horses and elaborate floats, are fun to peruse. 

   Next door, at the Library Company of Philadelphia (1314 Locust St., through Oct. 23), is "The Delegates' Library: The Intellectual Heritage of the Constitutional Era," which explores the role of books and the great thinkers who wrote them in the framing of the Constitution. 
The volumes on display cover such topics as: English jurisprudence; the liberal tradition as articulated by John Locke; political economy, particularly the theories of Adam Smith; the French Enlightenment; and America's own philosophical heritage. 

   For visitors with children, a must stop is the Please Touch Museum (210 N. 21st St.), which has mounted a charming exhibition called "Red, White and Blue: Childhood &amp; Citizenship." 
Various displays and participatory exhibits take a look at how Americans communicate national values to the younger generation. 
A placard tells us that "Children used to share far more fully in adult work and play. 
They marched in patriotic processions, sang patriotic songs, attended rallies . . . and even sat through the same tedious orations as their parents." 

   One of the most popular attractions seems to be a simple wooden lemonade stand (presumably it's supposed to show that the capitalist ethic is passed on at an early age) equipped with plastic cups but no real liquid. 
Though the sign says "5 cents," one youngster tried to charge his mom $7. 
Without missing a beat, she pretended to fork over the money. 

   Philadelphia-goers of all ages, of course, can also take this opportunity to visit or revisit Independence Hall. 
And one of the best reminders of the Constitution's legacy sits right across the street. 
When you take a turn declaiming from the podium of the newly installed "America's soapbox," it's hard not to remember that speech wasn't always free. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
