ID: 304	RANK: 84	SCORE: 8.511320
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871125-0128 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

In a Very Select Group
Of, Perhaps, 25 Million
---
By William M. Bulkeley
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> PLYMOUTH, Mass.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   There's a good chance you, too, are a direct descendant of the pilgrims. 

   Historians say that 26 of the 102 people who crossed the Atlantic on the Mayflower in 1620 and later celebrated the first Thanksgiving had children who had children who had children. 

   Today, approximately 12 generations later, the Mayflower passengers may well have 25 million descendants. 
"It could be one out of every 10 people on the street," says Cay Lanham, the governor general of the General Society of Mayflower Descendants. 

   But don't get any ideas about joining the Mayflower Society. 
For that, you'll need proof. 
Only 22,000 people have managed to join -- or have bothered to join -- the 90-year-old group. 
And for the past six years, the society has been very picky about whom it will let in. 
It has even been demanding that the children of current members document their bloodlines all the way back to the boat. 

   Mary Crismore, a 79-year old Indianapolis woman who joined the society in the 1960s and eventually became governor general of the Indiana chapter, hasn't yet succeeded in getting her grandson accepted. 
She says that four years ago the historian general -- the society's staff genealogist" -- told me my line wasn't any good." 
Mrs. Crismore is angry, and she is defiant. 
"I know the man was wrong," she says. 
To vindicate herself, Mrs. Crismore plans to resubmit her line, with additional documentation she has gathered. 
And she remains an active member, under a rule that allows anyone who has ever been admitted to membership to remain so. 
Still, she concedes, "I am hurt deeply." 

   It is possible, however, to get dumped by the society if you aren't alive to defend yourself. 
Two years ago, one of the organization's most distinguished members, William Howard Taft, was booted out posthumously. 
A photocopy of President Taft's application for membership was stamped "rejected" and posted in the society's offices here. 
It seems that research had discovered Mr. Taft was in fact descended from the second wife of a 17th-century farmer. 
The farmer's first wife was the one with the pedigree. 

   A lot of people in the society think things have gone too far. 
At the triennial September meeting, the incumbent historian general, Barbara Merrick, who is a hard-liner on documentation, was deposed from her $10,000-a-year job for brusquely rejecting applicants who didn't submit copies of birth, marriage and death certificates for every generation. 
The society replaced her with someone who, while strict, is tactful and tractable. 
Caroline Kardell, the new historian general, says she demands every bit of proof available, but "in a circumstantial case, I give an open-minded reading." 

   Since all descendants of the Pilgrims are eligible for membership, it would seem logical to assume that the children of current members would be in like Flynn. 
But many current members joined in the days when little proof was required and their own credentials in some cases are suspect. 

   The faction that currently advocates looser proof hopes for membership growth under the new historian general. 
"Papers are sailing through," says Doris Wiener, who heads the Arizona chapter of the society. 
For members whose ancestors went west or south in the 18th century, flexibility is important because records are scarce outside New England. 
"As these people were moving west, they didn't stop in housing developments. 
They were married in one town and had children in another," says Mrs. Wiener. 

   Hal C. Pattison, 80, a retired brigadier general from Fairfax, Va., and a leader in the movement to ease the standards of proof, says, "We don't want people in the society who aren't descendants of Mayflower passengers. {But} we feel it's the business of the historian general to demonstrate there's an error in a line rather than for a member's child or grandchild to have to find the documents." 

   Gen. Pattison has a personal interest in the matter: He is trying to get his wife into the group on the strength of her aunt's testimony as to the validity of evidence that Mrs. Pattison is related to a provable descendant of the Mayflower. 

   Barbara Merrick, the deposed historian general, is distressed to see standards relaxed. 
She says, "I was most insistent that primary source materials be provided for every generation." 
Until this decade, many people used secondary sources such as printed genealogies and newspaper clippings or even their own sworn statements. 
But, Mrs. Merrick says, when she told them their grandchildren couldn't join until complete documentation was submitted for every generation, many exploded. 
"They cursed me by phone, by letter, in person," she says. 

   "Years ago, all the {ancestral} societies accepted affidavits for oneself and one's parents and grandparents," says Ralph V. Wood, a Mayflower descendant and professional genealogist in Cambridge, Mass. 
"At a time when most societies have improved their standards," Mr. Wood says, "the Mayflower Society appears to have slipped back." 

   The Mayflower Society is one of more than 100 ancestral societies in the country. 
E. Digby Baltzell, a Philadelphia historian, says many of the groups were formed around the turn of the century when immigration was soaring, "to differentiate themselves from hoi polloi." 

   There is the 200,000-member Daughters of the American Revolution, whose members trace their ancestry to Revolutionary War patriots. 
There are societies for descendants of the earls and barons who forced King John to sign the Magna Carta; descendants of soldiers who fought in Sherman's march to the sea in the Civil War; descendants of Colonial tavern keepers; even descendants of illegitimate children of British kings. 
Mr. Baltzell notes that many include a broad range of ethnic and racial groups in their membership. 
Nevertheless, he says, "if you go to meetings, they're mostly sort of smug WASPs." 

   Apart from the family pride enjoyed, there isn't much benefit to society membership. 
Social historian Stephen Birmingham says Mayflower ties might help people get into fancy New York co-ops or certain boarding schools. 

   Mayflower Society members do meet around the country every November to recite a list of the Mayflower's passengers. 
Each member rises as his own ancestor's name is called. 
As members, these people promote awareness of the Pilgrims. 
But mostly they collect and preserve genealogical records. 

   In a small cottage behind the society's museum and just up the hill from Plymouth Rock, where the Pilgrims stepped ashore, Mrs. Kardell, the historian general, examines more than a dozen application papers a day. 
She says she rejects some applicants but is willing to advise them on what they need in order to become members. 
She says her predecessor "is a perfectionist who wanted every single certificate, which is just about impossible." 

   For example, Mrs. Kardell says she expects to approve an application from a Massachusetts woman who has traced her ancestry to an 18th-century woman named Anna Brooks. 
Mrs. Brooks, the applicant maintains, is the married name of Anne Hayward, a child whose Mayflower ancestry is provable. 
But there isn't a marriage certificate. 

   So the applicant pieced together circumstantial evidence. 
Mrs. Brooks died in 1822 at age 89, which means she was born in 1733, the year Anne Hayward was born. 
Land records show Anne's father, Ephraim, lived for a while in the same town as the Brooks family. 
And Anna Brooks named a son Ephraim, which was a Hayward family name but not one found on the Brooks family tree. 
"They have to be logical and build a case, straw by straw," says Mrs. Kardell. 
"I feel they have proved their case." 

   If you happen to be looking for your roots, "you shouldn't be upset if your ancestor has no connection to the Mayflower," counsels Mrs. Kardell. 
"You should be just as proud {if he was merely} a nice fellow." 
Of course, she acknowledges, "There's no Nice Fellow Society." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
