ID: 92	RANK: 20	SCORE: 15.193821
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870202-0076 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Rock's Hall of Fame: Keep It Exclusive
---
By Jim Fusilli</HL>
<DD> 02/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Last year, the Rock 'n' Roll Hall of Fame welcomed its first 10 inductees, big-name performers like Chuck Berry, Elvis Presley, James Brown, the Everly Brothers, Buddy Holly, Little Richard and Ray Charles. 
Sam Phillips, founder of Sun Records, disk jockey Alan Freed, and three pre-rock musicians who influenced rockers were also honored. 
The awards ceremony and the decision to construct a Hall of Fame building in Cleveland got big play, and the baby enterprise had a rousing start. 

   Last month, the New York-based foundation that oversees the Hall and its awards ceremony tried for the same splash. 
The Jan. 21 gala bash at the Waldorf-Astoria was a triumph: Some of today's bright lights presented trophies to this year's inductees and, during a late-night jam session, Roy Orbison sang with Bruce Springsteen, Bo Diddley played with the Rolling Stones' Keith Richards, and B.B. King and John Fogerty sang "In the Midnight Hour." 

   The cuisine -- meat loaf, mashed potatoes with gravy and Oreo cookies (standard rock 'n' roll backstage fare) -- was perfect. 
What wasn't perfect was the list of inductees. 

   The Hall of Fame Foundation's crack nominating committee was determined to induct 15 rock 'n' roll performers this year. 
So the deserving -- Mr. Orbison, Mr. Diddley, Mr. King, rhythm-and-blues shouter Big Joe Turner, Smokey Robinson, Marvin Gaye, Muddy Waters and Aretha Franklin, the first woman inductee -- wound up sharing the spotlight with the undeserving -- Bill Haley, Ricky Nelson, Eddie Cochran and the Coasters -- largely social phenomena who fall short of their fellow inductees as influential artists. 

   That's a trap the foundation must avoid if it intends to fulfill its promise and provide formal recognition for rock's seminal contributors. 
Consider: By inducting Mr. Haley, who's largely known for one hit, "Rock Around the Clock," somewhere down the road the Hall may have to let in Madonna, the living manifestation of all that's inartistic and manipulative about the genre. 
But by honoring the artists who've furthered rock as art, as the foundation has done in most instances, the Hall of Fame is something really terrific, not because it legitimizes the music but because it gives it its proper due. 

   All this wouldn't mean sand to the Sahara if the Rock 'n' Roll Hall of Fame and foundation weren't such a good idea. 
The group is committed to providing scholarship funding and to constructing a formal research library and archive within the museum. 
The state of Ohio and the city of Cleveland have pledged to raise the $18 million to $20 million in construction costs for a building designed by I.M. Pei. 
A site will be selected later this month. 
And the Hall of Fame awards serve as a reminder that rock didn't begin with the Beatles, or even Mr. Presley. 

   Here's how the honorees are chosen: 15 musicologists, music historians, writers and performers nominate about 40 candidates. 
Some 250 music lovers from around the world are then instructed to vote for as many as 10 candidates. 
To avoid rock's current hyperbolic publicity machinery, the Hall's lone objective eligibility criterion for a performer is that it be 25 years since his or her first recording. 
The rest is subjective. 
That one objective regulation needs review. 
It offers no special exemption for post-'60s popular artists who've died; no amount of publicity can distort the contributions of Jimi Hendrix, reggae's Bob Marley and country-rock pioneer Gram Parsons. 
An innovator like Sly Stone, whose career is as dead as the aforementioned artists, deserves consideration. 

   Another gripe: The pre-rock pioneers are apparently limited to three inductees a year; this year's were country-and-western singer/songwriter Hank Williams, swing and rhythm-and-blues singer and composer Louis Jordan, and T-Bone Walker, the bluesman. 
Last year the nod went to Jimmy Yancey, Jimmy Rodgers and Robert Johnson. 
There was no reason, save mathematical symmetry, to prevent Gene Krupa, the original rock 'n' roll drummer, guitar-solo stylists like Chet Atkins and Wes Montgomery, or bluesman Willie Dixon from getting in sooner rather than later, and long before Mr. Haley and Mr. Nelson. 
A similar unnecessary limited-number rule affects membership for rock businessmen. 

   Of course, the performers provide the glitz, and that's where the Hall of Fame concentrates its promotional efforts. 
It decided to induct 15 performers this year, and its list of superluminaries ran short two-thirds of the way there. 
So Mr. Nelson, the perennial Boy Next Door, went in alongside legends B.B. King and Jackie Wilson. 
The Coasters, whose primary contribution to rock's legacy is the novelty hits "Yakety Yak" and "Charlie Brown," became the first band in the Hall. (Listen to the sax solos in each of those songs; tenorman King Curtis and not the group should have gotten the honor.) 

   Like Mr. Haley, Chubby Checker is known for one hit, but at least "The Twist" was a great, barrel-chested rumble of a vocal. 
Some of the foundation's board members -- mostly record-company executives -- were less than thrilled by the inclusion of musicians whose images were greater than their talent. 
So it's possible that the rock-performers list will be trimmed to five next year. 
Let's see: The Beatles' first record was released 25 years ago. 
So was the Beach Boys'. 
Les Paul and Leo Fender, whose names appear on virtually every electric guitar used during most of rock's first quarter century, are available. 
So is Duane Eddy, an original guitar hero, and Motown's legendary rhythm section of drummer Benny Benjamin and bassist James Jamerson. 
Producer Phil Spector ought to be in. 
Pop songwriters Carole King and Gerry Goffin, Doc Pomus and Buck Ram would make good choices. 
So might Tina Turner. 
And there's not a Bill Haley, a Ricky Nelson, in the bunch. 

   ---
   Mr. Fusilli is manager of corporate relations for Dow Jones &amp; Co. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
