ID: 92	RANK: 32	SCORE: 13.495555
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861229-0013 </DOCNO>
<HL> Music's Next Elvis
Could Be a Product
Of School for Rockers
---
Despite Tradition of Learning
From Records in a Garage,
Formal Study Gains Fans
---
By Ken Wells
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/29/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> HOLLYWOOD, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Sometimes Tim Bogert's classroom gets so loud that even he wears earplugs. 

   Listening to some of his students -- in this case, the Flaming Beef Rockets -- play their guitars at a recent class, you can understand why. 
They play heavy metal rock the way it was meant to be played: very loud. 
"We're trying to re-create the ambiance of the real-life concert stage," explains Mr. Bogert, 42 years old. 

   Back in the 1970s, Mr. Bogert was a full-fledged rock star, performing as a bassist with the groups Vanilla Fudge and Cactus and recording a couple of million-seller albums in the process. 
Now, he teaches stage performance at the Musicians Institute, a trade school for rock 'n' roll and jazz musicians. 

   The institute's mission is to turn out guitarists, bassists and drummers with the level of skills in their fields that vocational schools have long instilled in plumbers and electricians. 
Students who make it through the one-year program will earn state-certified diplomas, the musical equivalent of an auto mechanic's license, in such areas as rock guitar, jazz bass or funk percussion. 

   "We like to think of ourselves as a players' school that prepares our musicians for the real world," says Pat Hicks, a guitarist and former music-store owner. 
Along with jazz guitarist Howard Roberts, he founded the institute in 1977 as a small enclave for serious jazz guitarists. 
Today, it has 886 students, double the number just three years ago. 
More than 600 are enrolled in the rock programs. 

   Traditionally, rock music is learned by listening to records and is practiced in garages and basements. 
But the institute isn't alone in trying to teach rock 'n' roll in schools. 
Students can also study rock at the Grove School, based in Ventura, Calif. 
At Five Towns College in Seaford, N.Y., secretarial students take courses alongside students in a two-year commercial music program that increasingly emphasizes rock and blues guitar. 
And the Boston-based Berklee College of Music offers the equivalent of a four-year rock 'n' roll degree as part of its "professional music" curriculum. 

   Perhaps two-thirds of Berklee's 2,600 students now enroll in rock classes, which range from Heavy Metal Band I and II to rock history. 
Just a few years back, Berklee mainly catered to jazz and classical students, says Rob Rose, the chairman of Berklee's performance studies department. 

   Though this is hardly the way Chuck Berry or Elvis Presley learned his art, some graduates have already achieved success. 
Musicians Institute students have gone on to work for the Beach Boys, the Alan Parsons Project, Chick Corea, the Righteous Brothers and Sade (pronounced shahr-DAY). 
Berklee's alumni include jazz composer Quincy Jones, guitarist Al DiMeola and drummer Steve Smith, who has played with the rock band Journey. 

   Paul Hanson, a flashy heavy metal guitarist, credits his Musicians Institute training with getting him a job coaching actor Michael J. Fox in guitar for the movie "Back to the Future." 
Then there is S.D. Grogan, a 35-year-old rock-band dropout, who says he enrolled at the institute to improve his playing and duck his bill collectors in another town. 
"This place is heavy," he says. 
"There ain't no doubt that if I live, I'm gettin' out of here a better guitar player." 

   The professionalization of rock training seems to reflect some good old-fashioned entrepreneurship. 
The Musicians Institute's Mr. Hicks notes, for example, that Americans alone own about 19 million guitars, including the million sold in 1985, creating a potentially vast market for schools like his. 
The rock-school phenomenon also reflects the growing sophistication of rock music itself. 

   "In all deference to Chuck Berry," says Berklee's Mr. Rose, "the music has moved well beyond three-chord progression." 
The driving rhythm and blues of the Rolling Stones, the jazz-inspired music of Sade, and the cat-quick, two-handed guitar work of Eddie Van Halen all fit within the rock genre now, he says. 

   Jas Obrecht, a senior editor at Guitar Player magazine, argues that classically inspired musicians like Mr. Van Halen and Yngwie Malmsteen are examples of new-generation rock guitarists who are "studying Paganini for their licks instead of other guitar players." 
Students wanting to "keep up with that kind of sophistication" are increasingly turning to rock schools, he says. 

   Mr. Van Halen, who never took a guitar lesson in his life, agrees and has delivered guest lectures at the Musicians Institute. 
Eric Clapton, a 1960s superstar, also supports the notion of formal training. 
He sponsored a guitar scholarship competition here last year. 
At Berklee, Felix Cavaliere, the founder of the Young Rascals, recently appeared at a rock-history class to tell students about surviving in the rock world. 
Among other things, he advised them to be picky in choosing whom they play with, noting that the Rascals succeeded in part because he recruited the members from the leadership of other bands. 

   If Paganini, a violinist and composer, could visit the Musicians Institute, he would find no resemblance to the cloistered 19th-century music conservatories he was familiar with. 
Instead of a quiet library where students pore over scores, the institute's students -- mostly male and averaging 22 years of age -- congregate in high-tech alcoves and run through ear-training sessions on computers or play along with videos of recorded classroom sessions. 

   One recent day, Steve Trovato delivered a crisp lecture on rhythm and blues to about 40 students as they sat, with unpowered electric guitars, trying to pluck blues solos from a written score. 

   "The blues," said Mr. Trovato, one of the institute's 50 part-time instructors, "translate lousily to sheet music." 
He then offered his own interpretation of the piece, running through a five-minute guitar solo that might have made blues master B.B. King envious. 
As a result, he got something diesel-mechanic instructors probably never hear: rousing applause from his students. 

   Just down the hall, Ron Eschete, a master jazz guitarist, interposed a complex series of chords in a simple Stevie Wonder song to demystify a theory that he hoped would improve his students' improvisational abilities. 

   At the institute, the faculty believes that students should steep themselves in all forms of contemporary music even if their sole ambition is to play punk rock. 
To be admitted, students must pass an entrance audition. 
Once enrolled, most spend about 12 hours a day in classroom, performance and practice sessions, mastering not just the mechanics of their instrument but basic music theory as well. 
No one graduates without learning to read music proficiently and passing a series of rock 'n' roll business courses. 

   "I offer seminars on everything from how to set up their own marketing network to how to get past the hotel operator and to the entertainment director to discuss bookings," says instructor Les Wise, a jazz guitarist and studio musician whose current specialty is business counseling. 

   But for Jean-Marc Porson, a 24-year-old Annapolis, Md., student, just being able to study under musicians like Mr. Bogert was enough to get him to enroll. 
In most schools, the faculty only abides the rock band, he notes, but each semester instructors like Mr. Bogert become the rock band and put on a concert. 

   "It might have been the best concert I've ever been to," Mr. Porson says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
