ID: 92	RANK: 59	SCORE: 11.896157
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880727-0119 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Music: Joe Satriani's Surfing Safari </HL>
<AUTHOR> Pam Lambert </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "The first time I heard Joe Satriani play I knew that within six months he'd be bigger than toilet tissue," says bassist Doug Wimbish, who's backed up some of pop's hottest. 

   At this point Charmin's still more of a household word than Satriani. 
But during the past half-year the guitarist six-string cognoscenti are beginning to mention in the same breath as Eric Clapton and Jeff Beck has toured Japan as Mick Jagger's handpicked lead player. 
He's had a planet named after him in a Marvel Comic. 
And he scored the highest-charting guitar instrumental album in a dozen years when his "Surfing With the Alien," released on the independent Relativity label, rode into Billboard's Top Thirty. 

   He's done it all his way. 
He doesn't do vocals, a choice that usually spells commercial suicide for a pop musician. 
But the intelligence of his playing has carried him along. 
So, more importantly, has his writing. 

   Satriani's technical skills would shame many so-called "guitar heroes," deified primarily for their fleetness of finger, but he never loses sight of the song for the solo. 
Like his own hero, the late Jimi Hendrix, the soft-spoken 32-year-old says he tries to "make sure the guitar serves the song, not the other way around." 
What he writes are less songs without vocals than ones that don't need them. 
The guitar is his voice. 
And he gives it memorable melodies to sing. 

   "Joe plays on many different levels," observes Wimbish, who shared the stage with him on the Jagger gigs. 
"He's not playing tongue-in-your-ear kind of music, he's playing to your soul." 

   Hyperbole? 
Not judging by the response of the SRO crowds who jammed "the Satch's" four shows here at the Bottom Line. 
Predictably the audience, which at one set included noted guitarists Frank Zappa and Pink Floyd's David Gilmour, went wild as Satriani scorched through such full-throttle rockers as "Surfing With the Alien" and "Satch Boogie." 
But the fans also cheered his dextrous two-handed tap-technique on the baroque-inspired "Midnight." 
And they erupted after listening raptly to the achingly beautiful ballad "Always With Me, Always With You." 

   For the guitarists in the house Satriani's diversified set, culled from "Surfing" and his self-financed first album, "Not of This Earth" (a k a "NOTE"), amounted to a virtual clinic. 
He demonstrated such tricks of the trade as two-handed fret work, blitzkrieg speed-picking and subtle vibrato with the wham bar -- not to mention masterful phrasing and tonal control. 
Unlike many rock players, however, he confined his acrobatics to the guitar. 

   During much of the concert Satriani stood planted, eyes closed, between burly bassist Stuart Hamm and polyrhythmic drummer Jonathan Mover. 
He wore a vaguely psychedelic outfit and a blissful smile. 
From time to time his eyebrows would rise as if he were surprised by the notes he was coaxing out of the instrument. 

   "Once I start playing I really can't be bothered with stage moves that are just for show; I know I can make contact with the people in the audience through the music," Satriani says the next day. 
"I'm really fortunate that all the songs we do are my own compositions. 
They started out from strong feelings and so it's very easy for me just to get into that feeling again. 
It's like method acting except it's with music." 

   At the moment Satriani's sipping a cappuccino, something he likes to do back home in Berkeley, Calif., with his wife, Rubina. 
He hasn't seen much of either this year. 
To promote "Surfing With the Alien," Satriani and his band have already barnstormed the country three times as well as toured Europe and Japan. 
Now Satriani's manager, veteran San Francisco concert promoter Bill Graham, has the trio scheduled to surf down the East Coast next month for a series of dates ending Aug. 19 and 20 here at the Pier. (This weekend a concert recorded earlier in the tour will be broadcast nationally over 200 radio stations on the "King Biscuit Flower Hour.") 
After that Satriani rejoins Jagger for swings through Australia and South America slated to run through October. 

   But he isn't complaining. 
Not too long ago Satriani was scraping by doing occasional session work, odd jobs he'd rather not discuss, and, mostly, teaching. 
He attracted some of his students by going to local music stores and surreptitiously slipping a professionally designed ad into the guitar magazines there. ("I created my own supplement.") 
His deal with his pupils: They learned the scales and theory he wanted to teach them, then he'd teach them whatever song they wanted to learn. 

   Some of them picked up a lot more. 
Like the perspective that helps to make Satriani not just a technician but a musician. 
"Technique is one of the biggest impostors that you can come across," the guitarist says. 
"To reduce technique to the amount of notes or the speed or the outrageousness with which they're played is taking three parts of what has to be a thousand-point category. 
Technique is about being able to play one note in front of a thousand people and get them to feel that it was a beautiful note. 
Technique is not playing when there are already enough notes." 

   Satriani's students have included Kirk Hammett of the much-talked-about band Metallica and Steve Vai, once with Frank Zappa and now rocker David Lee Roth's spotlight-stealing sideman. 
Vai was among Satriani's first pupils -- way back when both of them were teenagers in Carle Place, Long Island. 
At the time Satriani had been teaching himself to play for only about a year (he'd previously taken drum lessons and was studying music theory at school) but "since I had a mother and two sisters teaching it seemed like a very normal thing to do." 

   Today Vai credits his first teacher with showing him "what true musicality was." 
He's returned the favor. 
Vai's recommendation helped Satriani snare the Jagger gig. 
And the guitarist hooked up his old instructor with the Relativity label, on which Vai had previously released his own solo projects. 

   The extent of "Surfing With the Alien's" popularity seems to have surprised everyone involved, not least of all Satriani. 
Pleased as he is, he doesn't intend to let success stand in the way of his music. 
"If anything I feel less pressure about the next album," Satriani says. 
"Now I know there's an audience out there, that I've met personally, who've said to me, 'Joe, do whatever you want to do, just keep playing guitar.'" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
