ID: 303	RANK: 25	SCORE: 10.359248
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880830-0074 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Theater: 'King John': A Fresh Look at Shakespeare </HL>
<AUTHOR> John Sylviane Gold </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The New York Shakespeare Festival's summer production of "King John" has given many theatergoers -- myself included -- the chance to be virgins again. 
It's not often we get to see a Shakespeare play whose plot, characters, famous lines and legendary interpreters aren't rattling around our brains before the curtain goes up. 
I might have remedied this situation, of course, by reading the play in advance. 
But I couldn't see denying myself the opportunity to enjoy fresh Shakespeare on the stage. 

   And fresh it is. 
A colleague with 40 years of theater reviewing under his belt couldn't remember ever having seen this play. 
It's true that Stuart Vaughan's production, which runs through Sunday at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, amply illustrates why "King John" has been shunned by producers for so long; but it's also true that this play's time may at last be at hand. 

   Nothing will make it one of Shakespeare's great ones. 
It lacks dramatic focus, with three characters all vying for the audience's interest, not to say sympathy. 
And it lacks the soaring poetry that ennobles some of Shakespeare's other, equally sprawling histories. 
But some of the qualities that led to "King John's" neglect in the past also are the reasons we're likely to be more kindly disposed toward it today. 
The play fairly crackles with the kind of intrigue and scorn that give rise to, oh, say Iran-Contra scandals. 
Its multiple betrayals and shifting alliances make it the most deeply cynical -- and thus, perhaps, the most contemporary -- of Shakespeare's history plays. 

   Shakespeare adapted this play from an earlier, anonymous work called "The Troublesome Reign of King John," and the real King John's reign was troublesome indeed. 
At home, he antagonized his bishops and his barons; the latter got even by forcing him to sign the Magna Carta. 
Abroad, he battled the French and the Pope, who got even by excommunicating him. 
But Shakespeare is concerned chiefly with the means by which John struggled to hang onto his crown. 
According to a strict construction of the principles of primogeniture, the kingdom would have gone to John's young nephew, Arthur, upon the death of King Richard the Lionheart, who never married, but did leave a son, Philip the Bastard, who figures prominently in Shakespeare's play -- in fact, very nearly takes it over. 

   Philip is everything you could want in a dramatic hero: smart, courageous and, in Jay O. Sanders's rambunctious performance, just barely able to rein in his anarchic spirit. 
The problem is he hasn't got very much to do in the play except comment -- often devastatingly -- on its action. 

   Philip is prevented from being the play's hero by his subservient position; John is stymied by his character. 
Shakespeare has made him as ruthless as Richard III, but not as merry; as narcissistic as Richard II, but not as lyrical. 
John hasn't the force of Henry IV, or the humor of Henry V, or the pensiveness of Henry VI. Indeed, you feel that in King John, Shakespeare finally met his match: a character for whom he could have no sympathy whatsoever. 

   Kevin Conway works hard to overcome this problem, blustering here, whimpering there, practically crumpling under the weight of the onerous crown. 
It's an honorable, competent performance, but one that doesn't succeed in making us care for this unpleasant king. 

   There is yet another candidate for the hero slot in "King John": young Arthur, whose claim to the throne is taken up by the King of France. 
This child is guileless enough to be appalled by the war for which he is the pretext, yet canny enough to stay the hand of a determined assassin. 
The problem in dramatic terms is that he must be played by a child actor, almost certain to be unequipped for the role's subtleties. 

   The ladies in "King John" have a war of their own going on. 
John's mother, Queen Elinor, and Arthur's mother, Constance, are more eager than their sons for the crown of England. 
But neither Jane White nor Mariette Hartley can make the most of her juicy opportunities. 
Ms. White's regal Elinor lacks passion, and Ms. Hartley is stiff and shrill as Constance. 

   The performance problems may well be due to infelicitous direction by Mr. Vaughan, who let so many good actors go astray in the Shakespeare Festival's recent "Julius Caesar." 
And, as he did in that production, Mr. Vaughan is once again setting off great gusts of stage movement -- banners on parade, soldiers in flight, messengers in haste -- that seem completely divorced from what's supposed to be happening in the play. 

   Mr. Vaughan was artistic director of the Shakespeare Festival's first four seasons, and it's perhaps appropriate to note that in its 33 seasons, the festival hasn't yet achieved the aesthetic goal that was set for it. 
Joseph Papp's professed aim always has been to create a contemporary, urban, American style of Shakespeare performance. 
It hasn't happened. 

   From time to time, however, we've been allowed glimpses of what such a style might do. 
One such occasion was the first of this year's Delacorte offerings, "Much Ado About Nothing." 
Directed by Gerald Freedman, another old festival hand, it starred Blythe Danner and Kevin Kline as Shakespeare's hard-headed lovers, Beatrice and Benedick. 

   With these two stars at their best -- Ms. Danner haughty and gay, Mr. Kline dashingly comic -- and Jerry Stiller as a very New York kind of Dogberry, "Much Ado" had a fresh, kinetic verve. 

   Mr. Papp may feel that the formal British way of acting Shakespeare won't do for New York Shakespeare Festival audiences. 
But in a British Shakespeare production, most of the actors seem to be speaking the same language and living in the same world. 
That is almost never true in his. 
With this "Much Ado," for once at least many of the minor roles were up to the leads. 
Don Reilly and Phoebe Cates made a winsome pair of young lovers, and Brian Murray a wily Don Pedro. 
David Pierce was deliciously evil as Don John, and Dylan Baker was a leering Borachio. 
Who? you ask. 
Borachio is the accomplice who helps Don John carry out the wicked ruse that temporarily turns the comedy into a nightmare. 
It's a small but important part -- the kind that's been habitually left to fend for itself in Shakespeare Festival productions. 

   With this "Much Ado" as an inspiration, it's time for the festival to start some serious work on finding a consistent style for all its plays. 
The second year of the festival's Shakespeare Marathon, of which this summer's offerings were nos. 4 and 5, begins this fall. 
Wouldn't it be nice to hope that by its end, we could await the entrances of characters like Don John and Borachio with confidence instead of fear? 
Wouldn't it be nice to think that the New York Shakespeare Festival had made a contribution not just to the city it serves so well, but also to the poet? 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
