ID: 303	RANK: 82	SCORE: 8.324233
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870611-0078 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
Limiting the 'Supream Power'</HL>
<DD> 06/11/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The justices of the Supreme Court got up the courage to stick their toes in the waters of private property rights, and came up grinning. 
It wasn't too hot for comfort after all to use the Constitution to rescue a property owner from a government edict. 
We hope the justices will continue along the course they set Tuesday. 

   It helped that the plaintiff was so appealing. 
The First English Evangelical Lutheran Church of Glendale, Calif., wanted to reopen its retreat and recreational area for handicapped children after a flood. 
In 1979, Los Angeles told the church it couldn't use its land for this or any other purpose. 
L.A. wanted to use the land as a drainage channel. 
The church complained that this new zoning, even though theoretically temporary, was a "taking" requiring compensation under the Fifth Amendment. 

   Chief Justice William Rehnquist did the honors. 
L.A. might call this a "mere regulation," but that argument didn't wash. 
He wrote for a 6-3 court that no matter how "temporary" a taking is, if a landowner loses all use of property, it's treated the same as a permanent taking. 
The government can use the land for flood control, but must compensate the owners. 
This "will undoubtedly lessen to some extent the freedom and flexibility of land-use planners and governing bodies," the chief justice wrote, but, after all, "many of the provisions of the Constitution are designed to limit the flexibility and freedom of governmental authorities." 

   The court had accepted four similar cases in recent terms that were decided on procedural grounds without reaching the takings issues. 
We'd been hoping the court would get a chance to respond to now-common takings in the form of regulations. 
Local authorities have wielded their powers in ways that have sharply distorted property values in some urban areas, raising some values and cutting others while at the same time reducing property availability for new families. 
This case is a first step toward ending the false distinction between non-compensable regulations and compensable takings. 

   The Supreme Court sent the message that if "the public" wants to maintain a fresh-water wetland, landmark or view, "the public" must pay for it. 
The owners of private property can be forced to give up their property, but only if government pays them just compensation. 

   Aside from L.A., the big loser was Solicitor General Charles Fried. 
Mr. Fried won a battle inside the Justice Department that enabled him to support the local government against property rights. 
He made the startling claim that paying compensation was not the proper remedy for takings. 
This was an unusual deviation from original-intent jurisprudence espoused by the Reagan administration. 

   It will be interesting to see if Mr. Fried pursues this same course for two other takings cases the Supreme Court will decide. 
Both are from land-regulation-happy California. 
They are being pushed by the Pacific Legal Foundation, a defender of property rights. 
Nollan v. 
California Coastal Commission asks whether the state can withhold a building permit for the Nollan family to put an addition on a beachfront home unless it agrees to grant public access to its beach. 
The permit has nothing to do with it, the plaintiffs say. 
If California wants public access, it should reimburse them for the fall in property value. 
Pennell v. 
City of San Jose was brought by landlords who object to the city establishing rents based on the income of tenants. 
Subsidized housing should be subsidized by the taxpayers, not by the owners. 

   These takings cases go to the philosophical basis of the United States. 
The Fifth Amendment was a declaration of the limits of government and the rights of citizens. 
The Founders were heavily influenced by Roman law, which made ownership and possession the leading legal concepts. 
These ideas were incorporated into English common law, which began to use the law to restrain government. 
Blackstone's Commentaries traced property rights back to Magna Carta. 
John Locke wrote of natural, pre-government rights: "The Supream Power cannot take from any Man any part of his Property without his own consent." 
The Founders made this part of the Bill of Rights. 

   Ownership in America is not a privilege, but a right. 
It has made possible the growth from agrarian poverty to industrial predominance. 
The Third World is only now learning that broad-based economic development is impossible without a rule of law that limits government expropriation. 

   The takings clause is where political philosophy and pragmatism merge. 
The country not only does good by protecting private property, it also does well. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
