ID: 303	RANK: 87	SCORE: 8.226812
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870109-0080 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
The Singular Achievement</HL>
<DD> 01/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)
CONGRESS (CNG)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   It was 200 years ago that mankind had what may be its greatest political accomplishment. 
A group of men met in Philadelphia to write a document setting up an entirely new form of government: One powerful enough to unite and defend a continent while restricted to only limited powers. 
The world saw for the first time that a stable government need not be a tyrannical government. 

   This is the bicentennial of the Constitution, which was written in 1787 and ratified in 1789. 
Its purpose was, literally, to constitute a government. 
The document, following the "We the People" preamble, established the twin pillars of separation of powers and federalism. 
Even without the Bill of Rights, which came in 1791, the unamended Constitution offered great protection for individual liberties. 
The Founders agreed to delegate some power to the government, but were careful to limit what officials could do to its people, make them do or take from them. 
For two centuries, this has made the United States the shining city on the hill. 

   The Founders had the broad sweep of history in mind. 
These representatives of 18th-century enlightenment considered government a necessary evil. 
They were well versed in the failings of earlier societies, from Athens and Rome to the constitutional monarchies of Europe. 
They saw that guarantees of rights, from Hammurabi's Code to Magna Carta, were not self-executing. 
No prevention for the dormant virus within the liberal spirit -- dictatorship -- had yet been found. 

   The solution was limited government. 
The stroke of brilliance, shared by Montesquieu, Hamilton, Jefferson and Madison, was the indirect method of defining the powers of government by what it could not do. 
The Constitution specified the permissible activities of government, thus restricting officials to certain powers. 
It then divided these officials into checking and balancing branches. 
No one branch could rise as tyrant. 
The idea of limited government was implemented. 

   The main provisions are as elegantly simple as 1-2-3. 
Article I describes the authority of Congress over "all legislative powers herein granted." 
Article II vests the executive power in the president. 
Article III created the Supreme Court and authorized lesser federal courts. 
Most political power remained in the states or, as the founders put in, "in the people." 

   The result was ironic. 
One of the first acts of the New World established what by now is the oldest free society in the world. 
No other country can claim such stability over so long a period. 
The singular achievement of the Constitution is this continuing individual liberty, made all the more impressive when contrasted with another great revolution, the one of 1917. 
The Soviets took the opposite tack of granting all powers to the state and none to its citizens. 
The consequences are obvious. 
Today, students in Peking are demanding checks and balances for their communist government. 

   This is a year for self-congratulations, but also for some introspection. 
How well have we maintained the separation of powers? 
Readers of this page know our concerns. 
Congress presents a single, huge omnibus appropriation to the president that he can't veto because he doesn't have the line-item veto. 
Members of the House pass resolutions demanding the president adhere to arms-control treaties the Senate refused to ratify. 
The Iran/contra scandal is driven by legislation Congress passed to try to limit the president's freedom of action in foreign affairs despite his unique responsibilities under the Constitution. 
The federal courts too often make policy, not law. 

   We have been delighted with how Attorney General Edwin Meese has made constitutional issues a matter of national debate. 
Most apropos was his recent reminder that there is a big difference between the "supreme law of the land" -- the Constitution -- and what courts or the other branches at any particular time claim the law is. 
Particular rules change. 
Creations of the courts like the exclusionary rule and bans on school prayer are not the same as laws found in the text of the Constitution. 
Mr. Meese is correct to demand more respect for the text and original intent of the Founders. 

   The building of our constitutional system is a continuing project. 
Our allies are understandably frustrated by how some problems, like the cycle of destroying our own presidents, seem to never go away. 
To impatient critics, we say that our system is not perfect, but so far the record isn't too bad. 
We have gone from being an insular agrarian society to the industrial and military leader of the Western world. 

   We hope that the coming celebration of the Constitution's bicentennial will rejuvenate understanding and commitment to the document and its system of separation of powers. 
Fortified with such an understanding of their principles, Americans can look forward to further centuries of success. 
We will keep showing the world what can be accomplished by people living in the freedom that can exist only under a government of limited powers. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
