ID: 303	RANK: 92	SCORE: 7.964110
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880629-0068 </DOCNO>
<HL> Criminal-Libel Case, A Legal Throwback, Divides Community --- Black Editor May Have Erred But Jailing Stirs a Storm; Kingstree Versus the Press </HL>
<AUTHOR> Timothy K. Smith (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PUB </IN>
<DATELINE> KINGSTREE, S.C.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    Jim Fitts freely admits he is more activist than most journalists. He says he started his weekly newspaper, the Voice, in a barren storefront a year and a half ago "because it was the only way to let people know what was going on" in Williamsburg County. He had no journalistic experience and little money, and he says he conducted job interviews like this:
   "Can you spell?" 

   "Yea." 

   "Here's a pencil." 

   From the beginning, he says over a plate of fried fish at the Huddle House restaurant, "I was always on somebody's case." 
But he was particularly severe in his treatment of two legislators, State Rep. B.J. Gordon Jr. and State Sen. Frank McGill. 
He claims that the two legislators run the county as an old-fashioned political machine, obtaining grants that benefit their own businesses and exploiting the illiteracy of the rural population. 

   The 62-year-old Mr. Fitts, who is black, was jailed for two days last month and has now been indicted on the charge of criminal libel. 
The editorial that got Mr. Fitts into this fix contained the following unsubstantiated statement: "I will say to you, without fear of contradiction, if every black in Williamsburg County would start stealing today and steal every day for the rest of their lives, they could not steal as much as those two have stolen during their time in power." 

   Attorney Wallace Connor, who is representing the legislators and who is Mr. McGill's brother-in-law, denies those allegations. 
Mr. McGill, who is white, is in the hospital and couldn't be reached yesterday for comment. 
Mr. Gordon, who is black, didn't return phone calls. 

   This town would like to be known as the home of Joseph L. Goldstein, Nobel Prize 1985, as the sign just inside the town line proclaims. 
Otherwise, it wouldn't mind being identified as the site of the Battle of Kingstree, an obscure Revolutionary War skirmish described on a historical marker down the road. 

   But it suddenly is becoming famous as the town that jailed a black newspaper editor. 
And Kingstree today is preoccupied with this rare case of criminal libel, an action brought under a state law that makes it a misdemeanor to publish a false statement that injures someone's character or reputation. (Criminal libel is prosecuted by the government as a crime. 
Historically that was done as much to prevent breaches of the peace as it was to address injury to reputation. 
Injuries to reputations nowadays are generally dealt with in civil suits, in which injured parties are compensated.) 

   To some people in this mostly poor, mostly black, mostly conservative community, such a law makes perfectly good sense. 
To experts in libel law and to news organizations around the country, though, the case is a throwback to pre-Magna Carta England and to the common-law principles the monarchy used to justify keeping its heel on critics' necks. 

   Cases like Kingstree's "are extremely rare and still terribly dangerous" says Floyd Abrams, a libel-law authority at the New York firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel. 
"If prosecutors start to think that when attacked they can bring in the full panoply of state power, speech would be far more threatened than it is today." 

   The Reporters' Committee for Freedom of the Press has been watching the case. 
The South Carolina Press Association has contributed legal help. 
Newspapers have come to call, and television stations have telephoned. 
Mr. Fitts is startled and warily pleased by the fuss. 

   On reading Mr. Fitts's editorial, the legislators signed a warrant for his arrest on the criminal-libel charge, which carries a maximum penalty of a year in prison and a $5,000 fine. 
A magistrate set bond at $40,000. 
Mr. Fitts, unable to raise the money, stayed in jail for a weekend until an attorney got the bond reduced. 
Asked why he set the bond at 20 times the maximum fine, the magistrate, Clyde Lambert, said "I used my own judgment. 
I was just doing my job. 
There is nothing to explain." 

   The offending editorial was published May 17. 
Both Mr. Gordon and Mr. McGill, standing for re-election, won Democratic primary races June 14. 
A grand jury here indicted Mr. Fitts on Monday, and a trial date has yet to be set. 

   People in Williamsburg County are divided on the Fitts case and unaccustomed to all the attention. 
Most residents spend their days farming (tobacco, corn or soybeans) or working in one of several local factories, the biggest of which is a Tupperware plant. 
The tallest building in Kingstree has three stories, and the nearest big city is Columbia, an hour and 45 minutes away. 

   "The way I feel about it is both sides are wrong," says Vickey Nexsen-Boyd, the editor and publisher of Kingstree's other newspaper, the News. 
"I'd rather not comment." 

   At the King's Tree Inn, the night clerk says, "If {Mr. 
Fitts} said those things about them, then he should go to jail," adding "You're a reporter? 
I don't want to talk to you." 

   Press groups are outraged. 
"This strikes me as almost a textbook example of why criminal libel shouldn't exist," says Jane Kirtley, the director of the reporters' committee in Washington. 
"Somebody writes an article shortly before an election, {the legislators} swear out a warrant and the magistrate says OK, we're going to post a $40,000 bond for you and if you can't pay it, we're going to put you in jail." 

   Ms. Kirtley says 24 states and the District of Columbia still have criminal-libel statutes on their books. 
In 26 other states, the laws have been repealed or struck down as unconstitutional. 
Even in places where such laws still exist, they are seldom invoked, experts say, because the remedies most people seek in libel actions -- damages and the restoration of their good name -- are obtainable in civil suits. 

   Mr. Connor, the attorney representing the legislators, says, "I can sue somebody for a million dollars, but if they don't have five cents, I'm wasting my time." 
The reason for filing the criminal suit against Mr. Fitts, he says, "was not so much to punish him as {to serve as} a deterrent." 

   Mr. Connor objects to descriptions of the South Carolina law as "antiquated." 
He points out that the 1912 law is much newer than the First Amendment and adds, "If this is antiquated so are the Ten Commandments -- thou shalt not bear false witness." 

   Mr. Abrams, the libel-law expert, says criminal libel is a concept that goes back at least as far as the 14th century in English common law. 
It began, he says, as a way to protect the state, particularly the king, from criticism. 
"The basic rule was, the greater the truth, the greater the libel." 
After it was transplanted to our shores, it was gradually supplanted by civil libel laws, but the Supreme Court has never declared criminal libel laws unconstitutional. 

   Kingstree is awaiting the outcome of an eventual jury trial in the Fitts case, but already the affair is having its effects. 
At the counter of Bea's Snack Shop, a woman asked about the case declines to give her name. 
"There's a lot of things going on here," she says, "but I'm not going to talk about them because I don't want to end up like Jim Fitts." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
