ID: 273	RANK: 17	SCORE: 10.222475
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880216-0021 </DOCNO>
<HL> Abreast of the Market: An Appraisal: Some Turn to Stocks With Small Market Capitalizations </HL>
<AUTHOR> Beatrice E. Garcia </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> STK NDX </IN>
<TEXT>
   The muddled outlook for the economy these days has some investors seeking security in "defensive" shares of big companies that can thrive in good times or bad. 

   But others are betting that stocks with smaller market capitalizations -- usually those of small companies -- could be market darlings once again. 
Among the attractions are low prices and an expected shift in the takeover spotlight to small companies. 

   Small-capitalization issues "could be the next leadership group," says Dennis Sherva, a managing director of Morgan Stanley's investment-management unit. 
Carmine Grigoli, a market strategist with Kidder Peabody, says these stocks could outperform the market by 5% to 10% this year. 

   Indeed, the trend seems already under way. 
The Nasdaq composite index is hitting post-crash highs, and it and the Russell 2000 -- a barometer of small-company stocks maintained by Frank Russell Co. -- are outperforming Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 

   Because small-capitalization stocks tend to be more volatile than the rest of the market, they are likely to fall farther than the average stock if there's another big, overall slide in prices, says Mr. Sherva. 

   Another caveat is that the performance of small-capitalization stocks could be hampered by very slow economic growth in the first half of 1988, Mr. Grigoli says. 

   If some investors are slow to act on predictions of stellar performance for small stocks, it's because their track record hasn't been steady or very rewarding since 1983. 
And during the October crash, these stocks were beaten down even more than the blue chips. 

   But since December, small-company issues have been running ahead of the market. 
"Investors recognized these stocks were cheap," says Keith Mullins, head of emerging-growth stock research at Morgan Stanley. 

   T. Rowe Price Associates' New Horizon Fund, often used as a proxy for small growth stocks, is selling at about the same price-earnings ratio as the S&amp;P 500. 
That low a relative P-E ratio has preceded a big rally three times in the fund's 26-year history. 

   Mr. Grigoli of Kidder ticks off several factors besides cheap prices that could work in favor of small-capitalization stocks: With a stable or strengthening dollar, the translation of foreign profits may no longer be that big a plus for blue-chip multinationals; corporate restructuring and streamlining, which primarily benefited many large-capitalization companies, may be less important in 1988; and the 1987 tax changes took away the rapid-depreciation allowances and investment-tax credits that have fattened the bottom lines of many big concerns since the early 1980s. 

   Also, several analysts and money managers expect the focus of mergers and acquisitions -- which strongly lifted blue-chip stock prices over the past three years -- to shift to smaller companies this year. 
"There is less appetite for highly leveraged deals," says Mr. Grigoli. 
"Large companies with high cash positions are likely to go after smaller firms." 

   Why? 
Because, he says, stocks of many small companies are selling below their liquidation values. 
Large-capitalization stocks on the New York Stock Exchange are currently selling for 1.7 times book value, he says, but the smallest 20% of Big Board issues are selling for 0.85 of book value. 

   As with all investments, timing is the key. 
Analysts aren't sure if the current upswing in small-capitalization stock prices is the start of a prolonged advance or a "sucker's rally" that will fade and come back for real later this year. 

   History offers little guidance. 
Binkley Shorts, manager of the Over-the-Counter Securities Fund, says that even now it's hard to identify what set off the 1976-79 bull market in small-capitalization stocks, "except that they were screamingly cheap and they just caught people's attention." 

   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
   Stock prices advanced in active trading Friday, following news that the merchandise trade deficit narrowed in December. 
But the advance was tempered by renewed worries about inflation touched off by a 0.4% rise in producer prices last month. 
Bond prices slumped on the producer-price news. 

   The Dow Jones Industrial Average added 21.72 to close at 1983.26. 
For the week, it gained nearly 73 points. 
The broader market indexes also moved forward as New York Stock Exchange volume slowed to 177.2 million shares from 200.8 million Thursday. 

   Stocks with high dividend yields, such as Avon Products, GTE Corp. and Kentucky Utilities, were among the most-active issues once again. 

   Takeover stocks were also in the spotlight. 
MCA Inc. sprinted ahead 5 1/4 to 45 on news that real-estate investor Donald Trump owns 375,000 shares and may seek to acquire up to 24.9% of the company. 
United Inns soared 7 3/8 to 26 1/2 after the company said it has hired a financial adviser to identify potential acquirers. 

   Gillette sank 1 7/8 to 39 1/8, erasing an early gain. 
The company said late Friday that it had settled all of the lawsuits brought against it after it repurchased the company from Revlon Group in 1986. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
