ID: 273	RANK: 75	SCORE: 9.003291
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861215-0007 </DOCNO>
<HL> Abreast of the Market:
An Appraisal: Secondary Stocks
Are Best Avoided Now, Some Say
---
By Robert L. Rose</HL>
<DD> 12/15/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Investors in secondary stocks who don't understand why they haven't made money in the stock market since spring might glance at the table below for a clue. 

   The Dow Jones Industrial Average and Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index both reached 1986 and all-time highs early this month. 
But indexes that indicate the health of many other stocks made their highs in a five-week period between late May and early July -- and have lagged since. 


                                  High
    Index                      Reached On:
    Dow Jones Industrials        Dec. 2
    Standard &amp; Poor's 500        Dec. 2
    American Stock Exchange     June 25
    Nasdaq OTC composite        July  3
    Value-Line                   May 29
    Wilshire 5000               July  2
   A few analysts conclude from such signs that it's time to
bail out of stocks altogether. But others argue that the end
of a bull market would more likely be characterized by excess
speculation that would boost the riskier secondary stocks,
and they advise investors to concentrate on the bigger
blue-chip issues that are doing so well.
   Philip B. Erlanger, chief technical analyst at Advest in
Hartford, Conn., says there are signs even on the New York
Stock Exchange that many issues are faltering.
   On Wednesday, for example, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average rose 16 points. But only 23 Big Board issues hit new
highs, while 32 touched new lows. Another sign: The
advance-decline line, which reflects the cumulative
difference between the number of stocks rising and falling
each day, has been heading lower since April.
   Mr. Erlanger concludes it would be foolish to fight the
trend. "I would concentrate on areas that are relatively
strong in the market such as the blue-chip, defensive-type
issues," he says.
   Analysts say blue chips are outperforming other stocks in
part because they have more predictable earnings and are
considered safer than stocks of lesser-known,
small-capitalization companies. At the same time, they say
many individual investors who used to buy secondary stocks
are giving up in favor of mutual funds.
   As a result, an analyst who in September 1985 correctly
predicted a rebound by secondary issues, has a different
message today: "It's best to simply avoid that area of the
market and center attention on the high quality sector," says
Joseph H. Barthel, director of technical strategy at Butcher
&amp; Singer, a Philadelphia brokerage firm.
   Louis G. Navellier, author of the monthly newsletter OTC
Insight, in El Cerrito, Calif., says that if given a choice
between buying the Dow Jones Industrial Average or the Nasdaq
OTC composite index, he'd pick the blue-chip indicator. "I
would never buy the broad OTC market," he says. "There's a
lot of garbage out there, to be very honest with you."
   Rather than shun secondary issues, Mr. Navellier believes
the trick is to find a few good ones. He looks for those that
show earnings growth, yet have "reasonable" price-earnings
ratios. He also likes stocks that institutions are only
starting to buy. His favorites include Jefferson Smurfit,
Willamette Industries and Godfrey Co.
   The hunt is not an easy one. Mr. Navellier, who co-manages
a $29 million portfolio for investors, says he has to examine
1,100 OTC stocks to come up with 30 buys. Looking at a
similar number of Big Board stocks, he finds 200 he likes.
   Why not stick with the Big Board? Mr. Navellier says that
because it's less followed and less efficient, the reward for
being right is greater in the over-the-counter market.
   ---
   Friday's Market Activity
   Stock prices closed on a weak note as investors continued
to worry about declining bond prices and this Friday's
expirations of stock index futures and options.
   The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 11.39 to 1912.26.
For the week, the average lost 12.80 points, or 0.66%. The
Dow Jones Transportation Average did worse. It fell 26.1
points in the week to 834.77, for a loss of 3.03%.
   Kidder Peabody analyst Dennis E. Jarrett said the market
was suffering from "light volume, bad breadth and a general
malaise." Big Board volume slipped to 126.6 million shares
from 136 million Thursday. Declining Big Board issues led
advancers nearly 2-1, the seventh session out of eight in
which decliners had the edge.
   The Nasdaq OTC composite index dropped 1.80 to 355.93, and
the American Stock Exchange index was off 0.50 to 264.23.
   Oil stocks were a bright spot, boosted by strengthening
oil prices. Exxon rose 1 5/8 to 71 3/8, Mobil gained 1 to 40,
and Chevron advanced 1 to 48, all in heavy Big Board trading.
Pennzoil rebounded 1 to 69 1/2 after falling more than four
points in the previous session.
   Texas Commerce Bancshares, a heavy lender in the oil
patch, rose 2 3/4 to 26 1/2.
   ICN Pharmaceuticals skidded 5 5/8 to 18 3/4 in heavy
trading amid investor worries over the efficacy of its drug
to treat acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
