ID: 227	RANK: 50	SCORE: 25.058664
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870414-0060 </DOCNO>
<HL> Arrival of Discounter
Tears the Civic Fabric
Of Small-Town Life
---
Merchant-Customer Dealings
In Pawhuska, Okla., Seem
Frayed by New Wal-Mart
---
By Karen Blumenthal
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/14/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> WMT
RETAILING (RET) </IN>
<DATELINE> PAWHUSKA, Okla.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   For more than 40 years, Fannie and Leo Berkenbile have run little pharmacies around here, wooing customers with neighborly concern, generous credit and round-the-clock emergency service. 

   But their business has changed since a Wal-Mart Discount City brought its cut-rate prices to Pawhuska's edge four years ago. 
Sales have slid. 
Cash purchases have dwindled. 
And long-time customers have turned nasty. 

   "People come in and say we're robbing them" because the prices are higher than Wal-Mart's, Mrs. Berkenbile says. 
She and her husband would like to sell the store and retire, she says, but "frankly, at the rate this is going, this store won't be here in another year." 

   Some of this may sound old hat to big-city merchants, who saw their customers scatter to shiny new malls in the suburbs decades ago. 
But familiar scenes sometimes play themselves out differently in small towns, where merchant-customer relations are more personal. 

   Such is the case here in small-town Oklahoma. 
Angry consumers, such as those confronting the Berkenbiles, are only one sign. 
Angry shopkeepers are another. 
Five small-town Oklahoma druggists, including the Berkenbiles, are suing Wal-Mart Stores Inc. of Bentonville, Ark., charging that it is violating an obscure 1941 state law that requires retailers to sell their goods above cost. 
That has apparently angered Wal-Mart, which is spending thousands of dollars to get the law repealed - so far unsuccessfully. 
"We just don't feel the law serves any viable purpose," says Jim von Gremp, Wal-Mart's director of corporate and public affairs. 

   Few Oklahomans would want Wal-Mart, the nation's fourth largest retailer, to disappear. 
Its 77 Oklahoma stores employ about 9,500 people and offer much wider selections than local stores. 
But in a region already battered by the problems of the energy and agriculture industries, Wal-Mart's aggressive pricing can be devastating to local merchants. 

   Last year, a whole block of downtown stores here closed. 
The five-and-dime is gone, and so is the J.C. Penney. 
The population, already down to about 4,200, is still slipping. 
"Wal-Mart didn't cause the trouble," says Bonnie Peters of Peters Hardware, "but they haven't helped any." 

   Wal-Mart doesn't gain from such a downturn, either, of course. 
Healthy local merchants bring more rural shoppers to town and to its stores. 
But such a big corporation can't help affecting the commercial fabric of small towns. 
In places like Ringling, Elk City and Pawhuska, local merchants buy ads in the high-school yearbook and support the Future Farmers' pig sales. 
Shops offer personal charge accounts and repair broken items. 
Drugstores still deliver. 

   One recent Sunday night, Pawhuska pharmacist Alan E. Irby quit fixing a faucet in his house to open his store for an old customer. 
While he filled the man's prescription, he says, "we talked about his wife Pansy and the Shriners and the Blue and Gold Cub Scout Banquet." 
He adds, "You know, there's a certain amount of charm about living in a small town." 

   But the charm fades fast when customers start comparing local prices with the prices at the Wal-Mart down the highway. 
With more than 1,000 stores, WalMart is able to buy large quantities of items at a discount and then sell them for less. 
The strategy has made Sam M. Walton, Wal-Mart's founder and chairman, a billionaire, but it hurts retailers like Harry's Super Foods in Ringling, where a box of 32 large diapers sells for a dollar more than at Wal-Mart. 

   "It makes you look like you're profiteering," says owner Harry Goodman. 

   At the Pawhuska Wal-Mart, maintenance drugs like insulin, blood-pressure medicine and ulcer remedies are priced as much as $10 below the prices at local stores, and initially Wal-Mart advertised its lower prices heavily. 
"Some of my better customers were coming in here and waving the ad in my face," says John E. Snider, a druggist in Hominy, south of Pawhuska. 
"It hurt me professionally. 
It hurt my image." 

   Mr. Snider was angry enough to hire a lawyer in Tulsa and round up four other pharmacists to join him in the suit against Wal-Mart. 
They say the discounter is breaking a little-known state law that requires a merchant to sell products at least 6 3/4% above cost, unless the store is having a sale or matching a competitor's price. 

   After more than two years of legal wrangling, a Tulsa federal judge recently ruled that Oklahoma's law was constitutional and set a trial for late this year. 

   Meanwhile, Wal-Mart turned to the state legislature, hiring four of Oklahoma's top lobbyists and spending an estimated $80,000 to try to get the law repealed. 
Through a trade group, Wal-Mart and other big retailers placed ads in newspapers statewide, urging readers to "stop higher consumer prices" by writing to their state representatives. 
It also armed greeters, who welcome customers to Wal-Mart stores, with petitions calling for lower prices. 
They gathered more than 200,000 names in eight days. 

   But claiming that the law causes higher prices is "the worst case of misrepresentation in the history of Oklahoma," charges state Rep. Rick Littlefield of Grove, who lobbied against repeal. 
The law, he and others say, protects small operators from big corporations that lower prices, drive competitors out of business and then, when no competitors are left, raise their prices again. 

   "If the bill {to repeal} had passed, it would have resulted in businesses putting plywood over the doors and windows up and down Main Street, Okla.," Mr. Littlefield insists. 

   In Wal-Mart's case, the law takes aim at "loss leaders," under which the retailer advertises a few popular goods, like disposable diapers or sugar, at prices near cost to attract customers. 
While the ads may imply that all the store's prices are low, other items are priced higher to compensate for the loss leaders. (In fact, Wal-Mart's average markup is about 30%, small even for a discount store.) 

   At a hearing in February, Wal-Mart argued that it might have to prepare special ads just for Oklahoma if the law remained in force. 
And it noted that any company wanting to eliminate competition could merely set prices at 7% above cost. 
But the state's House Economic Development Committee rejected the so-called Wal-Mart bill by a 21-7 vote. 

   Back in Pawhuska, the local Wal-Mart has also come under fire from the Pawhuska Daily Journal-Capital. 
Last November the newspaper called the store "a billion-dollar parasite" and a "national retail ogre" for its miserly community contributions. 
Dave Story, then the newspaper's general manager, says he wrote the editorial after a chamber of commerce banquet drew more than 100 business people but no one from Wal-Mart. 
Recently, merchants and town leaders say, the Wal-Mart store has contributed to a downtown revitalization effort and become more active in town affairs. 

   At the Wal-Mart itself, shoppers are more interested in prices and choices than the town economy. 
Loren and Tonnie Pahsetopah say that they would drive miles to a Wal-Mart for the variety it offers. 
Jimmy Cheves holds out a pair of canvas work gloves that are on sale for $1.75. 
"You'd pay $4 for these at the grocery store," he says. 
"I think you can get better buys out here." 

   The downtown merchants know that all too well. 
The Western Auto store is being converted into a used furniture and antiques outlet. 
Peters Hardware has dropped Corning dishes and Oneida silverware because it can't match Wal-Mart's prices; it promotes gift items and a bridal registry instead. 
"Wal-Mart really craters a little town's downtown," says Fred M. Wright, who closed his TV and record store last October. 

   But across the street, Sally Carroll presides over a grill where cheeseburgers still cost $1.20. 
Though buildings around her are empty, she doesn't blame Wal-Mart, which she says is the last place in town where she can buy fabrics and affordable work clothes. 
Without it, she says, "we'd be lost -- we wouldn't have a dang store." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
