ID: 227	RANK: 81	SCORE: 23.526205
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871204-0152 </DOCNO>
<HL> Retailers Take
Tentative Steps
As Auto Brokers
---
By Karen Blumenthal
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> WMT PCLB
RETAILING (RET)
AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   A few big, successful retailers believe their customers might shop for their next new car at the same places they buy soap or appliances -- and they are quietly testing the idea. 

   Some new-car dealers think the retailers -- Wal-Mart Stores Inc., Price Co. and Amway Corp. -- might be right, so they're not so quietly trying to quash the idea before it spreads. 

   So far the experiments have been low-key and limited. 
But that gives little comfort to car dealers. 
"The last thing we want Sam (Walton, Wal-Mart's founder and chairman) to do is to get involved in the car business," says Dennis Jungmeyer, executive vice president of the Arkansas Automobile Dealers Association. 
Warned his group's recent newsletter: "What if Sears, Penney's or K mart decided to do the same thing? 
Next thing you know, Piggly-Wiggly would be selling" four-wheel-drive trucks. 

   That may be a bit far-fetched. 
But the specter of multibillion-dollar retailers in the car-selling game to any degree has raised auto dealers' fears. 
Painfully aware of how Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., K mart Corp. and others have cut into their parts and tune-up business, few dealers dismiss the marketing power and customer base of these retailing giants. 

   The retailers rarely have any car models on display. 
And they actually can't even sell new cars themselves; only franchised dealers can obtain new cars from auto makers. 
So instead, retailers refer customers to dealers who have agreed to deliver new autos at cut-rate prices. 
The customer then completes the purchase and takes delivery from the dealer. 
In turn, retailers receive a fee from the dealers. 

   Already, Sam's Wholesale Club, with about 80 warehouse stores nationally, has experimented with car sales in a few outlets in Arkansas, Texas and Florida. 
Sam's, a Wal-Mart unit, says it dropped its program because it wasn't worthwhile. 
But the bigger problem may have been that Arkansas and Texas dealers withdrew because of legal challenges. 

   Nick White, a Wal-Mart senior vice president and general manager of the Sam's chain, doesn't rule out the program's revival. 
"We thought it would be a benefit to our customers," he says. 

   Price Clubs of California, a 37-store, $3.2-billion discount club in the West and East also offers a car-shopping plan in some stores. 
And Amway, noted for its nationwide army of in-home salespeople, has quietly added cars to its list of soaps, cleansers and household supplies. 
Amway distributors can now sell their customers memberships in a program that would allow them to buy cars through 1,500 dealers in 26 states. 
Amway hopes to expand the dealer list to about 35 states. 

   To head things off, dealers in some states are turning in competitors who strike bargains with retailers. 
The complaining dealers are taking advantage of state laws that prohibit third-party fees for helping sell new cars. 
In Texas and Arkansas, dealers offering cars through Sam's were warned any fee paid Sam's would be illegal. 
After a California dealer complained to motor vehicle officials, four San Diego dealers working with Price Clubs began paying the chain a flat "advertising" fee for displaying brochures and prices, instead of a per-car fee. 

   By some estimates, as many as half the states have such laws, and some people think they're unfair. 
"Why shouldn't you as a consumer have a free choice to buy a car from whom you want?" asks Arnold W. Wonsever, president and chief executive of Car/Puter International Corp., an auto-buying information service. 

   But dealers claim the laws, many enacted in the past decade to prevent brokers from eventually selling new cars and eroding dealers' new-car franchise, protect consumers from sellers who can't provide service or live up to warranties. 
"The auto business is a particular business where you need service along with your sales," says James T. Caplinger, president of the National Automobile Dealers Association. 
He adds: "If we're going to have a franchise, we should be allowed the privilege of selling the cars." 

   Participating dealers like the car-sales programs. 
They save time by eliminating price dickering. 
Moreover, although near-wholesale pricing is implied, prices include a modest, standardized profit margin for the dealer. (Indeed, individual shoppers can sometimes match the prices -- if they're willing to shop and haggle enough.) 

   George Cameron, national fleet sales manager for Jim Allee Oldsmobile-Jeep-Renault in Dallas, says that a plan that generates 20 to 30 sales a month would be a success. 
"We aren't trying to knock in a home run on every single sale," he says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
