ID: 181	RANK: 89	SCORE: 4.637423
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870521-0091 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Art Turns Political in the
Shadow of the Shining Path
---
By Constanza Montana and Dianna Solis</HL>
<DD> 05/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> AYACUCHO, Peru  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In the arid hills above this tormented city in the grips of a Maoist guerrilla movement, the renowned artisans have a new subject: violence. 

   Long known as the folk art capital of Peru, Ayacucho is today part of an "emergency zone" heavily patrolled by counterinsurgency platoons battling the far-left Shining Path, or "Sendero Luminoso," guerrillas. 
The power struggle has claimed more than 10,000 lives nationwide. 
And the artist-citizens, caught in the middle, are increasingly producing art that reflects that violence and appeals for peace. 
Appropriately, Ayacucho's name in Quechua, the ancient language still spoken by Indians here, means "corner of the dead." 

   After decades of weaving, carving and sculpting to make "retablos," or wooden boxes with shelves of religious or harvest scenes, the artisan workshops have become laboratories for the effects of politics on art. 
And the effect is not pretty. 

   Gone are the tourists that once flocked here to buy the retablos and whimsical ceramic churches. 
Without that trade, struggling peasant artisans have adopted themes of protest, and have diversified into producing cheap artifacts for government military men, who now occupy the isolated mountain area with tanks and rifles. 
In a tacky bid for the soldiers' "soles," the Peruvian currency, the artisans chisel and tool military emblems into leather wallets and create replicas of a nearby monument that commemorates the 1824 Ayacucho battle for Peruvian independence from Spain. 
Inscribed on the alabasterlike stone is the military motto: "Until we burn the last bullet." 

   "Violence," says Abilio Vergara, a social science professor at the local university, "has become a merchandise." 

   The emergence of Peruvian protest art occurs as U.S. interest in folk art flourishes. 
Auction prices are moving upward and museum sponsorship of major folk art exhibits is increasing. 
The San Antonio Museum of Art, for example, recently secured Nelson A. Rockefeller's celebrated collection of Mexican folk art. 
The collection of the Santa Fe Museum of International Folk Art has doubled in recent years. 
And even posh Neiman-Marcus department stores are selling Peruvian pottery and applique murals for as much as $350. (Though this applique work, known as "arpilleras," was first produced by Chilean women protesting government repression, the Neiman-Marcus examples show tennis games, workouts and Christmas scenes.) 

   Though half of exported Peruvian folk art is sent to the U.S., there is a limited flow of protest work that reflects the reality of today's Peru. 
Some blame this on the difficulty of marketing such unsettling work. 

   The work, nonetheless, is considered by many as an important anthropological statement. 
In Austin, Texas, importer Jonathan Williams has two huge painted tablets of Andean violence hanging in his Jodaline Importing Co. office. 
But, he says, "Many of the tourists don't want to be reminded of the terrorism." 

   Yet others praise the politically inspired retablos. 
In Albuquerque, Martha Egan of the Pachamama gallery sells and owns some of artist Nicario Jimenez Quispe's retablos. 
Says Ms. Egan: "I buy them because they need to be preserved for their historical and political meaning. 
They are showing the reality of their lives -- the hardships, the joys, the rich traditions of very old cultures . . . and the terror of armed conflict." 

   In Ayacucho's dusty artisan barrio of Santa Ana, 26-year-old Saturnino Oncebay weaves powerful tapestries of slumped-shouldered women grieving for their dead. 

   "The artists are caught in the middle," Mr. Oncebay explains over his lunch of watery, meatless soup. 
"We just want to work and to live. 
But the art won't stay quiet. 
It will always express the reality." 

   The artists have adopted a journalistic eye for detail, taking their inspiration from the abuses of both the military and the "Senderistas." 
The drawings and inscriptions on brightly painted wooden tablets from the village of Sarhua once gave family histories but now show soldiers kicking women in the stomach or Senderistas forcing people to listen to what one tablet labels "false promises of social justice." 
Hunger strikers, or "huelgistas de hambre," have replaced choirboys in ceramic churches. 
And many of the retablos that traditionally have depicted religious or genre scenes now show Quechua Indian "campesinos" crucified on crosses of cactus. 

   In the village of Quinua, 19-year-old Gregorio Aparicio Canchari memorialized a 1984 massacre in clay and paint. 
Soldiers, saying they were investigating an earlier murder, took four young men to a nearby hilltop and executed them, including Mr. Aparicio's older artisan-brother. 
In the haunting mural on the wall of the family's dimly lit workshop, the painter has pasted a small photograph of himself, which he thinks someday will commemorate his own killing. 
"Maybe I'll die and leave a memory," he says. 

   For now, Mr. Aparicio is building a reputation with church sculptures and retablos that depict what he calls Peru's "dirty war." 
One retablo of an Ayacuchan massacre so startled Gertrudis de Solari, a leading folk art collector in Lima, that she placed it on exhibit in her gallery, Los Alamos. 
The 3-foot-high retablo shows a hunger strike and a shoot-out between the army and the guerrillas. 
Blood spews from dismembered bodies and guerrillas wear red caps emblazoned with hammers and sickles. 

   Although the military's plain-clothed detective force says it doesn't censor this art, some artists chronicling the misdeeds of government troops say they have received threatening visits from the security forces. 
Peru's most honored "retablista," Florentino Jimenez Toma, was one of them. 

   After the 1983 assassination of eight Peruvian journalists near Ayacucho, Mr. Jimenez and his son, Nicario, created a retablo modeled on the death of Jesus. 
The Jimenezes divided the top level into three scenes depicting Jesus walking up Mt. Calvary, his crucifixion and his burial. 
The next three levels show the journalists climbing the hills, their deaths at the hands of the military, and their graves. 

   "The Peruvian Investigative Police asked me how I knew about this, if I had gone to the site," says the elder Mr. Jimenez. 
"They told me not to do this anymore . . . but how can they repress my abilities?" 

   An official government inquiry that year, led by Peru's leading writer, Mario Vargas Llosa, concluded that the villagers killed the journalists after they mistook them for Shining Path guerrillas. 
The charges were later dropped for lack of evidence, but recently a Lima court found three peasants guilty and ordered a Peruvian military attache in Washington to be tried on charges of obstructing justice and abuse of authority. 

   Working by neon and sunlight under a roof held up by tree-branch beams, Florentino Jimenez and his daughter, Eleudora, continue to carve clay-dough figures for their retablos with knives and toothpicks. 
The desolation and poverty that surround his dirt-floor studio are relieved by a garden bursting with corn stalks, bougainvillea and calla lilies. 
"I am a slave to this work," says the 51-year-old artist. 
"Este es mi pan" ("This is my bread"). 

   ---
   Ms. Montana and Ms. Solis are reporters for the Journal, in Los Angeles and Houston, respectively. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
