ID: 268	RANK: 48	SCORE: 4.667113
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890828-0155 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890828 </DD>
<AN> 890828-0155. </AN>
<HL> Manager's Journal:
@  A Damn Yankee Can Make It in Korea
@  ----
@  By Jay R. Tunney </HL>
<DD> 08/28/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> FREST </CO>
<DATELINE> SEOUL  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   On a hot, humid Saturday not long ago, about 300 well-wishers gathered at the main outlet of my Hobson's ice cream franchise here to celebrate one year of its being alive. 
Some people had told me it never would open. 
Others said it wouldn't last six months. 
I often wondered myself. 

   When the regional tax office came with 10 men and ripped down my $1,000 banner, claiming it was illegal, and when the Korean bureaucracy turned down the 10th appeal to import Hobson's flavorings needed to manufacture the premium ice cream, I was angry. 
Another time, as I wrote in this newspaper nearly six months ago, a second-echelon bureaucrat almost forced me out of business before I even opened. 
But when the same government authorities extended my deadline to take on a Korean equity partner, I was relieved. 

   These mixed feelings of frustration with and gratitude toward the authorities are part of the everyday life of a foreigner doing business in Korea. 
In fact, such contradictions are what seem to make the Korean world go round. 
A Western businessman needs to be ready for them. 
Here are a few hard-learned facts of Korean business life: 

   Don't expect instant success. 
Gear your thinking to the long term. 
My first objective was to understand what motivates Koreans to buy Western-style consumer products. 
What I discovered was a tradition-bound suspicion of foreigners, especially foreigners who peddle foreign products. 
Success, I learned, has to be a grinding-it-out process of years, not weeks, with the hope that the quality of the product will win out. 

   This disinclination toward foreigners will change as more Koreans travel abroad to see and touch the world, and as more foreigners are seen dwelling easily in their midst. 
Koreans interact more easily with Westerners than do other Asians, possibly because Koreans and Westerners tend to share such personality traits as spontaneity and a lively sense of humor and fun. 

   Tread the political waters carefully. 
Influential Koreans and expatriates deny the significance of anti-Americanism because responsible people in Korea feel pro-American. 
But anti-Americanism is significant. 
I see it daily in the Korean customers who pointedly interrogate our counter help, questioning why and how an American should be allowed to make money off hard-working Koreans. 

   Another example is when I put my children behind the counter thinking it would add a certain American flair. 
But I noticed many Korean customers were unnerved to see them there, as though it were not a foreigner's place. 

   Members of the younger generation don't remember the anguish of the Korean War, nor do they sympathize with the gratitude their elders bestow on Americans for helping save them from communism. 
They want their own identities in a new Korea. 
They do not want foreigners setting the pace. 

   Keep an open door and an open ear to labor. 
The visible, often violent labor battles plaguing Korea contradict the tradition of a work force motivated by gratitude to a benevolent, paternalistic employer. 
That old Confucian ideal has given way to new democratic ideas of organized labor rights. 
That does not mean, however, that labor strife is inevitable. 

   In my still-growing fast-food operation of 20 employees, labor disputes don't exist. 
I am a working and participating boss who personally tends to the employees' private needs and problems. 
The atmosphere is kept informal; there are no closed doors, no secrets. 

   On a much larger scale, such a paternalistic structure still can be followed in Korea. 
The clearest example is Samsung Group, the largest company in Korea, where there have been no labor problems, because of the company's sensitivity and attention to maintaining harmony and a high level of motivation among company personnel. 
Properly motivated, the Korean labor force is one of the most productive in the world, and the expatriate executive should not lose sight of this despite the current labor problems. 

   Handcuff your lawyer and follow the spirit, not the letter, of the contract. 
Foreign businesses find it most difficult to adjust to the interplay between written contracts and personal relationships. 
Because personal relationships, not legal contracts, guide their behavior in society, Koreans prefer to develop closeness with foreigners before dealing with them. 
I spent 60 hours over 3 1/2 months negotiating a partnership with a large Korean food-processing company. 
The first third of the time was spent getting to know one another, going out to lunch, dinner, etc., to see if we could live together from a "personal" standpoint. 
Koreans want to be friends so that if conditions or circumstances should change the original premise of the agreement, they can improvise. 

   Consumerism in the land of thrift is new and sometimes threatens old ways. 
For the first time in Korea's recent history, domestic consumption has exceeded export consumption, 48.7% to 48%. 
With export growth slowing and consumption at home exploding, foreign businesses should keep in mind that local demand is increasingly the engine of Korea's continuing rapid development. (Korea is Asia's second-largest domestic market after Japan.) This turnabout has been propelled by an average urban household income of $12,000 a year (compared with only $1,600 in 1975) and a strengthened won, making Korean exports more expensive and imports cheaper. 

   The inherent contradiction of all this, however, must be considered. 
The new consumerism puts pressure on Koreans to behave contrary to all they've been taught and trained to think over centuries: the Confucian values of moderation and thrift. 
Suddenly there is a new generation that enjoys shopping and instant gratification. 
There even is modest wealth among the working classes because of recent hefty wage settlements. 
There is more leisure time: Workweeks have been reduced to 44 hours from 55. 
For foreigners, tapping into this expanding market can mean opportunity, but beware of the pendulum swinging back. 

   If you don't have any teeth, use your gums. 
The government's liberalizing policy toward imports beckons foreign merchants of consumer goods. 
These new businesses provide jobs for Koreans and provide a certain joy to people's lives while raising their standards of living. 
Koreans are beginning to believe that they don't lose by importing. 
They gain by learning foreign technology, designs and know-how, which they can absorb into their can-do culture. 
It's the same culture that provided the spectacular 1988 Olympics, the same one that proclaims "do it even if it is impossible" and "if you don't have any teeth, use your gums." 
One can think of no better formula for success than such an attitude . . . even for a foreigner. 

   ---

   Mr. Tunney has spent most of the past 20 years in Korea, Hong Kong, Burma and Japan. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
