ID: 268	RANK: 64	SCORE: 4.449836
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870522-0158 </DOCNO>
<HL> TECHNOLOGY:
A Fax Machine in Every Spot?
Idea Isn't So Far-Fetched Now
---
By Dennis Kneale
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DCPY
OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)
COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN>
<TEXT>
   PITY THE POOR facsimile machine. 
While computer networks route data at blinding speeds, the fax pokes along, using phone lines to transmit a replica of a page every half minute or so. 
It is a technological throwback, conceived more than a century ago. 

   The fax would seem destined for the trash heap, supplanted by fancier, faster and cheaper computers. 
But facsimile technology has its place: When an exact image of, say, a signed contract or bank check is needed, a printout just won't do. 
Fax makers, moreover, are coming out with new-tech wrinkles that have faxes acting increasingly like computers and photocopiers. 
The machines now have computer memory and fancy phone-dialing features. 
They boast new abilities to link up in networks, and a standard design lets rival brands communicate easily. 
Faxes also are getting smaller, faster and less expensive. 
Machines that sold for more than $4,000 only a few years ago now can be had for less than $2,000, and prices may fall below $1,500 by next year. 

   COMING SOON is the personal fax era, thanks to falling prices, easier-to-use features and a new approach that wraps fax functions into a slide-in circuit for desktop personal computers. 
With 20 million PCs in offices and only a few with fax capability, there's a big potential market. 
Analyst Donald Ryan of CAP International Inc. in Marshfield, Mass., says 25% of PC users would prefer their PCs to a fax machine to send documents. 

   Some 600,000 faxes are now in use at perhaps 10% of the nation's three million business sites, estimates Mr. Ryan. 
He predicts U.S. unit sales may reach 250,000 this year, up from 191,000 in 1986, and may get up to 425,000 by 1990. 
He notes that fewer than 1,000 PC cards with fax features were sold last year, but he sees sales of 14,000 cards this year and 150,000 in 1990. 

   "One day everybody will have a fax. 
It's idiot-proof," says Gerald L. Brodsky, president of the American Facsimile Association. 
He uses one at home to send notes to his daughter at her workplace. 
Eric Arnum, editor of the newsletter EMMS, predicts department stores will begin selling facsimile machines in several years, when prices fall to $400. 

   FACSIMILE FIRST SURFACED in 1842, when Alexander Bain, a Scottish clockmaker, invented a device that used a pendulum that swept a metal point over a set of raised metal letters. 
When the point touched a letter, it created an electrical charge that traveled down a telegraph wire to reproduce on paper the series of letters that the pendulum had contacted. 

   Wire-service photos were transmitted by fax by the 1930s. 
In the 1960s, a court decision opened phone lines to use by more than just phone equipment and pushed fax into businesses. 
But the machine was a clunker: It took six minutes or more to send a single page. 
In 1976 a state-of-the-art fax sold for $18,000 and needed 100 computer chips to do what two chips can do today. 
By 1984 the fax was more advanced but bulky. 
"It must have weighed a hundred pounds," says CAP's Mr. Ryan. 
"Now you can get the same function in 20 pounds, it sits on your desk and costs half as much." 

   For all the breakthroughs, the fax still relies on the clockmaker's idea of 145 years ago. 
A scanner reads a page and converts it into a digital set of electrical charges, which are translated into high-pitched and low-pitched sounds (analogs) to represent the black and white dots that join to form letters, spaces and pictures. 
The sounds travel over a phone line to another fax, which reconverts it all and prints it out with a heated ribbon on slick-coated paper. 

   Some of the latest advances were on display this week at the International Communications Association trade show in New Orleans. 
Sharp Electronics Corp. showed a five-pound, dictionary-sized model that sends a half-page memo in 10 seconds. 
Datacopy Corp. executives were talking about their $1195 slide-in circuit card that lets an IBM PC double as a fax machine. 

   DATACOPY'S CARD has a microprocessor and memory chips that store a digital replica of a document, using the PC's modem and phone lines to transmit to another PC or fax machine. 
It is one of the first to work "in background," letting users fax pages even as they continue crunching numbers in a spreadsheet. 
"It's crazy to do something on a PC, print it out, walk down the hall and put it on the fax to send it to somebody," says James McNaul, a Datacopy vice president. 
"It's an idea whose time came about two years ago." 

   But Joseph Cosgrove, a marketing manager at Sharp, says PC cards are the wrong approach. 
"Millions of people in the U.S. aren't computer literate, don't want to be, and won't want to send fax on a PC." 
So Sharp takes another route. 
In Japan, the company sells a $1795 fax that can also link to a PC by cable. 
It will be sold in the U.S. this summer. 

   Many obstacles could alter the ambitious forecasts for faxes, of course. 
The PC fax card must drop to below $500, like the prices of slide-in cards for other functions, to be a big seller. 
And so far, a fax that can use plain bonded paper for formal business correspondence is expensive -- more than $4,000. 

   But fax fans are sanguine. 
Sharp's Mr. Cosgrove says a fax phone number on a business card is becoming a status symbol. 
And the trade group's Mr. Brodsky says facsimile one day will replace the postman. 
That might have its drawbacks, though. 
Fax can be "too fast," eliminating the old excuse for a late letter. 
"Sometimes," Mr. Brodsky says, "you'd rather say that it's in the mail." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
