ID: 268	RANK: 97	SCORE: 4.067045
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871113-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
Ruder vs. Ruder</HL>
<DD> 11/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   We were flabbergasted when the top government official charged with protecting securities trading threw more mud into the waters. 
Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman David Ruder gave a speech on Wednesday that completely flipflopped his earlier skeptical view of proposed inside-trading laws. 
Mr. Ruder put himself on the side of regulation-happy zealots who in their insatiable drive to indict bankers, arbs and analysts would chill valuable market information. 

   Everyone agrees that we need a statutory definition of inside trading. 
It is outrageous and probably unconstitutional that people have gone to jail for an offense that does not exist in the criminal statutes. 
The SEC and federal prosecutors have relied on a prohibition against "fraud" in securities trading, leaving it to the courts to define this vague term. 
Defendants learn that they broke the law only upon conviction. 

   The problem is that Mr. Ruder embraced the "misappropriation theory" in his speech Wednesday to the National Investor Relations Institute. 
He pledged backing for a definition to cover trading by "persons associated with the market, by friends and relatives, and by other persons who knowingly violate relationships of trust and confidence by utilizing inside information for their own benefit." 

   The danger is in creating a definition that would harm the integrity of the markets more than having no definition. 
The prime example on the table is the definition proposed by Harvey Pitt, a former SEC lawyer and now a Washington defense lawyer. 
Mr. Ruder said he was "engaged in examining" the Pitt definition, which the agency had earlier flatly opposed. 
Senators Riegle and D'Amato introduced Mr. Pitt's misappropriation language into a bill to make it a crime to buy or sell stock using information obtained "wrongfully." 
Wrongful information is that obtained by "theft, conversion, misappropriation or a breach of any fiduciary, contractual, employment, personal or other relationship of trust and confidence." 

   We know that Mr. Ruder knows better. 
The evidence that he understands the misappropriation theory would be a disaster comes from a stinging letter Mr. Ruder wrote to Mr. Pitt on May 15 while still a securities professor at Northwestern Law School. 
Mr. Ruder didn't mince words in objecting to the definition in Mr. Pitt's proposed bill: 

   "The misappropriation theory has no reasonable relationship to the desire to protect the integrity of the marketplace and should be abandoned," Prof. Ruder wrote."The theory reaches too far and has no identifiable limits. . . . 
My comments should be understood as supportive of an effort to define insider trading in order to create certainty, but not supportive of an effort to increase the reach of the insider trading restrictions to persons . . . whose activities are remote fom the securities markets." 

   The Supreme Court agrees with Prof. Ruder. 
The justices rejected the misappropriation theory as unworkably vague in the Dirks case and will consider the issue again this term in the Winans case. 
This theory would cause extraordinary uncertainty about who is covered for what behavior, and lead to years of litigation. 

   Until Mr. Ruder's surprising remarks, the SEC was steadfast in demanding a clear, bright-line standard for inside trading. 
The agency emphasized that only a clear rule would allow the free flow of all information that wasn't stolen from a client. 
A report by SEC economists explained why it is so important that traders be at ease exchanging information. 
"Legitimate research" by analysts leading to informed trading, the report said, "aligns actual stock prices with their theoretically correct values, improving the allocation of scarce capital between competing uses." 

   Mr. Ruder has been in Washington only a short while, yet for some reason has completely caved in to the voracious demand to "do something" about inside trading. 
Congressmen often want to do something, but this rarely means they know what to do. 
There is no reason for the man President Reagan appointed to serve markets to pander to demands for regulations that he knows would harm the flow of information that drives efficient markets. 

   Chairman Ruder should follow Prof. Ruder's advice. 
The misappropriation theory is a terrible idea. 
Instead of making all traders indictable, what we need is a clear law that simply makes it criminal to steal information. 
Someone should tell Chairman Ruder that occasionally Washington will respect an argument based on rational thought -- but only if someone bothers to make it. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
