ID: 279	RANK: 18	SCORE: 9.690306

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06168112 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06168112 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (5), chart; PHOTO: Photos by David Muench; Lower Falls of the
Yellowstone River at the first National Park, Yellowstone, in Wyoming; PHOTO:
The ever-changing landscape at Big Bend National Park in Texas is a
'photographer's heaven.' (color); PHOTO: A peach orchard at Shiloh National
Military Park in Tennessee stands as it did during the Civil War. (color);
PHOTO: Author Wallace Stegner finds Crater Lake National Park in southwest
Oregon 'very quiet and moody -- profound. The lake is very blue, and that
thing is deep; you have the sense of it going clear through to China.'
(color); PHOTO: An entire downtown has been resurrected and turned into a
national park in Lowell, Mass., the nation's first planned industrial
community. Writer Alston Chase calls it 'a spectacular example of urban
renewal.' (color); CHART: Knight-Ridder News Service; Recreation trends and
public lands tourism; Attendance at public lands facilities is increasing each
year. Meanwhile, more Americans are becoming "windshield tourists" who engage
in short, motorized sightseeing, rather than extended camping or hiking trips.  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  TRAVEL; RECREATION; MULTIPLE; PARK; US; NAME; LIST; MAJOR-STORY  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  WHEN President Woodrow Wilson signed the act creating the National Park
Service on Aug. 25, 1916, the fledgling agency was charged with protecting the
natural beauty of Yosemite, Yellowstone and 34 other "crown jewels" of the
West. As the National Park Service celebrates its 75th anniversary, its domain
has grown far beyond the imagining of its founders: 357 parks, monuments,
seashores, rivers and preserves stretched over more than 80 million acres, the
world's greatest system of parks.;    Today, the park service not only
protects scenery and wildlife, but must defend treasures such as the Grand
,9p3,9p4,9p4,8p9,8p6,8p,7p6 Canyon against smog and other modern-day
encroachments, manage newer facilities -- such as San Francisco's Golden Gate
National Recreation Area -- that are more urban playgrounds than wilderness
sanctuaries, and shepherd the ever-growing ranks of visitors whose sheer
numbers threaten the health of parks such as Yosemite and Great Smokies. Last
year, the parks tallied a record 251 million visits, and officials expect even
more company this year as events in the Persian Gulf and a lingering recession
prompt vacationers to stay closer to home.  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Travel  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  PARK PLACES
THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE'S DOMAIN HAS GROWN
TO 80 MILLION ACRES IN 75 YEARS; WHO BETTER
TO DESCRIBE THE SYSTEM'S TREASURES, FROM ALASKA'S
WILDS TO THE EVERGLADES, THAN THOSE WHO'VE
DEVOTED THEIR LIVES AND ART TO IT  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  Cover Story
Nancy Shute, a Washington, D.C., writer, is a contributor to Outside,
Smithsonian and Travel &amp; Leisure magazines.
Additional information attached to the end of this article
See also related story on P. 8T of this section  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     If you are one of the thousands heading for a national park this year, here
are a few suggestions from the ultimate guides: eminent writers and
photographers who have devoted much of their lives to chronicling the
splendors of the American landscape. Their choices were at times surprising;
some spoke of truly hidden or rare places, such as New Mexico's El Morro
National Monument or Alaska's Koyukuk River, while others, including Wallace
Stegner and David Muench, found private paradises amid big parks such as
Oregon's Crater Lake and Maine's Acadia. Their joy in a place was palpable,
whether their visit was the first or the 50th. These poets of the land speak
for all of us who love the national parks and the heritage they embody.;    
NATIONAL WONDERS. In 1872, Yellowstone was named the nation's first park; for
decades thereafter, parks were chosen as outstanding examples of the natural
splendors of the American West. Wallace Stegner, Pulitzer Prize-winning author
of the novel "Angle of Repose" and of many volumes of Western history,
considers Crater Lake National Park in southwest Oregon, established in 1915,
a classic of the genre. "People miss out on Crater Lake," Stegner says. "They
forget about it." Not only is Crater Lake off the interstate, but its shores
are shrouded in the deep snows of the Cascade Range for eight months of the
year, accessible only on skis or snowshoes. Stegner says, "My granddaughter
just came back from skiing there and was lyrical about it.";    His
granddaughter's lyricism is well-founded; the 1,900-foot-deep lake, remains of
a violent eruption that leveled Mount Mazama almost 7,000 years ago, glows an
eerie blue. Even in midsummer the Rim Road, which offers stunning views of the
lake, feels uncrowded, and Stegner praises the trails that wind through the
park's cathedral-like forests. "There's a kind of mystery about that park.
It's very quiet and moody -- profound. The lake is very blue, and that thing
is deep; you have the sense of it going clear through to China.";    Acadia
National Park is the only national park on the rocky New England coast, and on
summer days the roads on Mount Desert Island are packed with vacationers. It's
not the sort of place you'd expect to find New Yorker writer John McPhee, who
traveled most recently among the pirates of Guayaquil for his book "Waiting
for a Ship." But in the more secluded corners of Acadia, he finds a placid
retreat from his New Jersey home. "It's the most beautiful coast you ever
saw," McPhee says. "It's got fiords in it, deep penetrating bays, and the
spruce go right to the water.";    To escape the crowds, McPhee heads off to
the carriage trails through the woods, built by wealthy industrialists who
vacationed on the island at the turn of the century. "It's a favorite place of
mine to run, to ski, to hike." McPhee loves the rough face of the Schoodic
Peninsula, where rocks still bear the scars of glaciers that carved the land
centuries ago. "It's a hell of a scene.";     ANCESTRAL TRACES. Many park
units were created not to protect natural history, but to preserve the marks
of human history on the landscape. Stewart Udall, historian and secretary of
the interior in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, treasures El Morro
National Monument, a sandstone cliff in a remote area of central New Mexico
that stands on the route of the first Spanish explorers. "There's a huge
butte, a 'castle,' " says Udall, author of "To the Inland Empire." "El Morro
means castle in Spanish. On the wall is an artifact, the oldest European
signature artifact in the U.S. Juan de Onate wrote it in 1605.";    Onate's
inscription was to the point: "Passed by here the Governor Don Juan de Onate,
from the discovery of the Sea of the South on the 16th of April 1605."
Travelers who followed left their own marks, first in Spanish, then English,
through the late 1800s; the rock bears more than 1,000 testimonials. Udall has
called the rock "a unique register of Western history." He adds, "It's a magic
place.";    Far to the east of El Morro in Iowa lies an even older memorial to
the work of human hands. "A pretty well-kept secret and a great place for the
whole family is Effigy Mounds National Monument," says John Madson, a wildlife
biologist and writer whose works include "Where the Sky Began: Land of the
Tall Grass Prairie." The Woodland-Hopewell Indians, skilled artisans, built
Effigy's 191 animal-shaped burial mounds out of soil between 600 and 1300 A.D.
The flying birds and marching bears remain clearly visible today; one bear is
137 feet long.;    To Madson, there's more to the mounds than the resting
places of prominent people long past. "What gets to me is something one of the
rangers pointed out, "Madson says. "Look at all the labor that was involved in
carrying all the dirt up from below by the basketful. And look at all the care
that went into designing the mounds. It transcends mysticism, religion and
politics of a people. It impinges on love and respect for those who died.";   
Lowell National Historic Park is a monument to a far more recent endeavor: the
industrial revolution. Alston Chase, author of "Playing God in Yellowstone
Park," a critique of Park Service management of that hallowed park, praises
the service's resurrection of Lowell, Mass., the nation's first planned
industrial community. "My father grew up in Lowell," Chase says. "I remember
it as a nearly dead mill town. But the Lowell National Historical Park is a
spectacular example of urban renewal. The whole downtown has been made a
national park. In the 19th century it was known as the Venice of America. You
can take a trip on the canal boats, and they've rebuilt the antique trolley
system.";     REMEMBRANCE OF BATTLES PAST. Alarmed by a nearly successful
effort last year to turn part of the Manassas Civil War battlefield into a
shopping mall, the National Park Service is escalating efforts to protect the
many historically significant battlefield sites that remain in private hands.
But Shelby Foote, a Tennessee historian and author of "The Civil War: A
Narrative," who became familiar to some 39 million people in the epic Public
Broadcasting Service series on that war, says he's lucky.;    Shiloh National
Military Park in southern Tennessee, close to his heart and home, is the best
preserved of all Civil War sites. The gentle green fields stand as they did
just before the two April days in 1862, when there were almost 25,000
casualties in one of the war's bloodiest battles. "Shiloh really has not
changed," Foote says. "When I go there, I feel like I own it. It's one of the
things you get out of writing, if you think you're writing well; you do feel a
sense of proprietorship. But the truth is, it's a part of every American
citizen.;    "I like to go to the peach orchard where Confederate Gen. Albert
Sidney Johnston was shot. I like to go to the stump where he died. I like to
go where Sherman couldn't sleep because of the rain. It's still all there.";  
 For many people, the Academy Award-winning film "Dances With Wolves" brought
to life the tragic clashes between American Indians and white settlers. The
park service has custody of many battle sites of the 19th-century Indian wars,
and Barry Lopez, naturalist and author of the prize-winning "Arctic Dreams,"
is haunted by Big Hole National Battlefield, 10 miles west of Wisdom, Mont.;  
 Early on an August morning in 1877, federal troops attacked the Nez Perce
Indians camped in the little sagebrush-dotted valley of the Big Hole River.
The Nez Perce were surprised; they thought they had left the war behind them
in Idaho, and were cutting tepee poles for an extended stay. Instead, the
battle at the Big Hole drove the Nez Perce south into further warfare and
harsh exile. Lopez visited the battlefield just before Christmas. "I was there
on a bitter cold day in December. It was overcast; there was a light snow
falling. It was in the neighborhood of 15 degrees. The visitor's center was
closed. Somebody had left a loudspeaker on, with Christmas carols playing. It
was the worst kind of irony.";     PRECIOUS REMNANTS. Michael Frome has spent
the better part of his life chronicling the national parks; the 25th edition
of his "The National Park Guide" just came off the press. He went to Big
Cypress National Preserve, directly north of Everglades National Park, just
last spring. Big Cypress was established in 1974 to help protect the
Everglades' threatened water supply, but Frome says it is a worthy addition to
the system in its own right, harboring Indian ruins and endangered species
such as the Florida panther and the manatee.;    Big Cypress also gives Frome
something the swampy Everglades can't: trails. "In Big Cypress I can walk on
the ground. I see endangered species of plants. I can see pelicans and I can
see spoonbills. I don't see the panthers, but I know they're in there and that
I'm sharing the space with them, sharing remains of the original Florida.";   
 THE WILD LANDS. While the Everglades and other parks are threatened by
development nearby, others remain triumphantly wild. Fully two-thirds of the
park system's 80 million acres lie in Alaska. Aside from Denali National Park,
which faces an onslaught of tour buses each summer, the 49th state's parks and
preserves remain isolated, welcoming only those intrepid enough to charter a
floatplane, kayak a river or walk the tundra. Mardy Murie, author of "Two in
the Far North" and "Island Between," never let the lack of a visitor center
stop her. The first female graduate of the University of Alaska, Murie had
just turned 22 in August 1924 when she set off up the Koyukuk River, now a
protected wild river and part of Gates of the Arctic National Park, with her
husband, legendary wildlife biologist Olaus Murie.;    "I spent my honeymoon
on the Koyukuk," Murie recalls. "Olaus and I were married at Anvik on the
Yukon at 3 a.m. We were waiting for the little steamer to come down the
Koyukuk. It's a wonderful river to travel on," she says. "It's a lovely place
and there's nothing dangerous about it.";    Landscape photographer David
Muench, whose many books include "Eternal Desert," has been tramping the
backcountry with his cameras for two decades. Still, he gets excited when he
steers his four-wheel-drive truck toward Big Bend National Park, where the
Chihuahuan Desert, the Chisos Mountains and the Rio Grande River converge in
an extravagant desert wilderness 300 miles southeast of El Paso.;    "Every
day something changes," says Muench, who visited Big Bend most recently in
March. "The plant life is a mix -- there are aspen on the peaks in the Chisos,
and even some pines up in the canyons on the South Rim. You have all different
levels of the desert community, plus the river -- it defines what Big Bend is.
It's photographer's heaven," Muench says.;    Few people think of California
as a wilderness state, but photographer, writer and mountaineer Galen Rowell,
whose works include "Yosemite" and "My Tibet," says some of the world's
grandest wild lands lie along California's John Muir Trail, 211 miles long and
unbroken by a single road.;    "The most spectacular area on the trail,
though, is King's Canyon and Sequoia national parks, stretching along the
crest of the High Sierra," Rowell says. "The trail ends on top of Mount
Whitney -- the highest peak in the Lower 48.";    Rowell has climbed in the
great mountain ranges of the world, from the Alps to the Himalayas. But, he
says, "from Mount Whitney you can see more diversity. In the distance is Death
Valley National Park. Straight down is Owens Valley, the deepest valley in the
U.S. On the other side of the valley are the bristlecone pines of the White
Mountains, the world's oldest living things. Look west and you'll see snow on
the mountains well into the summer.";    Rowell has discovered that the hand
of man has even less influence on King's Canyon and Sequoia than it did in the
past. He can prove it, too. His mother hiked the entire Muir Trail in the
1920s and his aunt's photo of a King's Canyon meadow, taken back then, shows
the grass less lush than when Rowell photographed it a few years ago. He says,
with great satisfaction, "Some mountain meadows are in better shape than they
were in John Muir's day.";  If You Go . . .; MANY units of the national park
system charge an entrance fee; a $25 Golden Eagle passport, available at any
park, allows entrance to a carload of people to all park units for the year.; 
  Further information is available from the National Park Service's Office of
Public Inquiry; call (202) 208-4747, or write the U.S. Department of the
Interior, National Park Service, P.O. Box 37127, Washington, D.C. 20013, or
write the specific unit at:;    (check) Acadia National Park, P.O. Box 177,
Bar Harbor, Maine 04609. Museum, trails, camping, horseback riding, boating,
bicycle, snowmobile and ski trails, lodge, restaurant.;    (check) Big Bend
National Park, Big Bend National Park, Texas 79834; (915) 477-2251. Picnic
areas, campgrounds, horseback riding, boating, lodge, restaurant.;    (check)
Big Cypress National Preserve, Star Route, Box 110, Ochopee, Fla. 33943; (813)
695-2000. Restaurant, picnic area, campground.;    (check) Big Hole National
Battlefield, P.O. Box 2371 Wisdom, Mont. 59761. Museum, tours.;    (check)
Crater Lake National Park, P.O. Box 7, Crater Lake, Ore. 97604; (503)
594-2211. Museum, tours; picnic areas, campground, restaurant, ski trails.;   
(check) Effigy Mounds National Monument, Rural Route 1, Box 25 A, Harpers
Ferry, Iowa 52146; (319) 873-3491. Museum, tours, trails, ski trail.;   
(check) El Morro National Monument, Route 2, Box 43, Ramah, N.M. 87321; (505)
783-4226. Museum, guided and self-guided tours, picnic area, campground.;   
(check) Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve, P.O. Box 74680,
Fairbanks, Alaska 99707; (907) 456-0281. Museum, tours, hiking, boating.;   
(check) Lowell National Historical Park, 169 Merrimack St., Lowell, Mass.
01852; (508) 459-1000. Museum, tours, boating, bicycle trail.;    (check)
Shiloh National Military Park, P.O. Box 61, Shiloh, Tenn. 38376; (901)
689-5275. Museum, tours, picnic area, bicycle trail.;    (check) Walnut Canyon
National Monument, Walnut Canyon Road, Flagstaff, Ariz. 86004; (602) 526-3367.
Museum, trails, picnic area.; -- Nancy Shute  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  Nancy Shute  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910616  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  June  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  1T  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  PHOTO; CHART  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,803  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday June 16, 1991
00168112,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
