ID: 253	RANK: 17	SCORE: 17.216562
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881026-0035 </DOCNO>
<HL> Technology: New Train Control Systems May Reduce Collisions, Cut Fuel Bills, Boost Capacity </HL>
<AUTHOR> Daniel Machalaba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> UNP BNI CSX NSC </CO>
<IN> TRA </IN>
<TEXT>
   Last week, a Union Pacific Railroad Co. train dispatcher in Omaha, Neb., typed a command at a computer console. 
In response, a 110-car coal train 285 miles away in western Nebraska braked to a full stop. 

   The test by the Union Pacific Corp. unit was an important demonstration of new train control systems, say rail executives, boosting prospects that the industry will soon dispatch trains automatically. 

   Installed nationwide, such systems could sharply reduce train collisions, cut the industry's fuel bill and increase rail traffic capacity, the executives say. 
By some estimates, widespread installation of the systems could save the U.S. railroad industry between $500 million and $700 million a year. 

   Advanced train control systems represent "the most important technological development in the railroad industry since the diesel locomotive" replaced steam engines in the 1950s, says John Riley, head of the Federal Railroad Administration. 

   The Union Pacific coal train was brought to a stop by an onboard computer that activated the brakes. 
Although a crew was aboard the train, the computer received instructions by radio from the Union Pacific's central dispatching office in Omaha. 
Transponders buried in the trackbed transmitted the exact location of the train to an antenna under the locomotive, which then radioed the information to the dispatching center. 

   Union Pacific said it plans to install similar systems on its entire railroad network within five years. 
Burlington Northern Inc.'s rail unit will decide next year when to install a rival control system on half of its network, one that uses satellites to locate trains. 
And CSX Corp. and Norfolk Southern Corp. say their railroads also may begin tests soon. 

   Burlington Northern said it is encouraged by results of a test of its system in northern Minnesota. 
The railroad equipped 17 locomotives with receivers to pick up signals from satellites in the government's Navstar Global Positioning System. 
By comparing the times that signals from three or more satellites are received with the times of transmission, the receiver calculates its distance from each satellite. 
From these distances it derives the train's position, which is radioed to the railroad's dispatching office near Minneapolis. 
The office then radios orders back to the train. 

   Edward Butt, director of Burlington Northern's advanced railroad electronics system, says the system locates trains far more precisely than existing methods. 
Traditional systems can locate trains when they enter or leave track sections, called blocks, ranging in length from two miles to 20 miles. 
"We lose position of trains because it isn't easy for an engineer to know exactly where he is, particularly at night and in bad weather," Mr. Butt says. 

   In contrast, computers aboard Burlington Northern locomotives in the Minnesota test can track trains within one mile an hour of their actual speed and within 150 feet of their actual location. 
Such precise information helps dispatchers control the speed and scheduling of trains to save fuel and reduce delays, Mr. Butt says. 

   The new control systems will also help railroads as they increasingly concentrate freight shipments on their most efficient routes. 
Jeff Young, Union Pacific's director of advanced train control systems, says the new technology will permit railroads "to run trains a lot closer together and still ensure safety." 

   The Association of American Railroads, a trade group, estimates that U.S. railroads will spend more than $1.5 billion over the next 10 years to replace current signal systems with advanced versions. 
The railroads don't expect resistance from their unions. 
The new technology is "like an automatic pilot on an airplane," says a Burlington Northern spokesman. 
"It doesn't mean you get rid of the pilot." 

   The trucking industry also is using satellites to track shipments. 
Moreover, Magellan Systems Corp., a closely held Monrovia, Calif., company, says it has developed a hand-held global positioning system receiver for recreational boats costing $3,000. 
The company said it also may market the device to snowmobilers, cross country skiers and backpackers. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
