ID: 253	RANK: 70	SCORE: 13.282066
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870112-0092 </DOCNO>
<HL> Wide Review of Railroad Safety Expected
In Aftermath of Amtrak-Conrail Disaster
---
By Laurie McGinley and Daniel Machalaba
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
CONGRESS (CNG)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The recent collision of an Amtrak passenger train with Conrail freight locomotives is likely to prompt renewed scrutiny of a wide range of rail safety issues -- from the adequacy of emergency equipment to the design of passenger cars. 

   "It's a failure of public policy that the government has spent the past decade arguing over whether Amtrak should exist instead of deciding how we could improve it," says Ross Capon, executive director of the National Association of Railroad Passengers, a Washington advocacy group. 
"What we have now is an opportunity to address the broader issues of safety." 

   Even before the Jan. 4 accident, Rep. James Florio, the New Jersey Democrat who is chairman of the House subcommittee on transportation, had planned a February hearing on rail-safety issues. 
And last week, Democratic Sen. Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, the new chairman of the Senate subcommittee on transportation appropriations, announced plans to hold a hearing on the Amtrak crash. 
Those hearings may produce legislation aimed at beefing up rail safety along the Northeast Corridor. 

   At a minimum, Mr. Capon contends, Conrail locomotives operating on the Washington-Boston route should be required to have automatic-braking devices. 
Amtrak trains are equipped with such systems, which are linked to trackside signals and are designed to slow or stop a train automatically if the engineer misses or ignores a warning signal. 

   Such a device on the Conrail engines, Mr. Capon says, could have prevented the Jan. 4 accident, assuming the trackside signals were working properly. 
Federal investigators have indicated that the signals were working, but the Conrail engineer has insisted that a signal two miles before the accident site malfunctioned. 
The accident, which killed 15 people, occurred north of Baltimore when a string of Conrail engines slid through a switch and into the path of an Amtrak train. 

   Mr. Capon and others also argue that high-speed passenger trains and slow-moving freight trains shouldn't be operated on the same tracks, as they are on the Northeast Corridor. 
A Conrail spokesman, however, says the corridor is the "most efficient way of routing traffic, in many instances." 
Also, sharing the track is the only way at present that Conrail can provide service for about 100 customers, including automobile assembly plants in Delaware and New Jersey. 

   While federal investigators are still trying to determine the precise cause of the collision, they are also focusing on so-called survivability issues to determine whether the interior design of the Amtrak cars contributed to injuries, says Joseph Nall, the National Transportation Safety Board member who is leading the federal investigation. 

   Investigators are probing whether luggage and other objects flew off baggage racks and struck passengers or impeded their exit from the cars; they say at least one microwave oven was dislodged on impact in one of the cafe cars. 
They are also trying to determine the extent to which seats were ripped from their moorings and flung through the cars. 
Amtrak spokesman John Jacobsen says none of the seats except for those in the severely damaged first three cars were dislodged. 

   These issues have come up before. 
The Safety Board, reporting on an Amtrak derailment in Vermont in July 1984 -- an accident that killed five -- noted that "unrestrained baggage was thrown from overhead racks . . . striking and injuring passengers, and some wall mirrors in the lounges were shattered." 

   The Safety Board, in its report, urged Amtrak to develop devices for its overhead luggage racks to restrain baggage in the event of an accident. 
Amtrak officials say they plan to use such devices on new coaches and are considering retrofitting existing cars. 

   The Safety Board has also criticized the Federal Railroad Administration -- the Transportation Department agency that regulates railroads -- for failing to set more stringent requirements for the interior design of passenger cars. 

   In an August 1985 letter to FRA Administrator John Riley, the board said: "In view of the overwhelming documentation that injuries have occurred and continue to occur as a result of the features of the passenger-car interior . . . the board fails to understand FRA's rationale for not taking immediate action." 

   In response to the criticism, Mr. Riley says the FRA has been working since last summer on a new design for luggage racks that would restrain baggage more effectively. 
The agency wanted to have a possible solution to the problem designed before it set a new standard, he says. 
And Amtrak officials say that, even absent new regulations, they have moved to improve some features, such as the ability of passenger seats to withstand an accident without being thrown through the car. 

   Mr. Riley adds that he intends to explore whether passenger trains should be equipped with seatbelts. 
In the past, neither the Federal Railroad Administration nor the Safety Board has pushed the idea of installing seatbelts in trains. 

   Federal rules dictating time-off requirements for crew members are also likely to be reviewed. 
Currently, engineers must have eight to 10 hours off between runs, but critics say the rules don't guarantee that engineers will be sufficiently rested when they report to work. 
Mr. Capon of the association of railroad passengers says that the irregular schedules of freight trains are particularly hard on crews. 

   On the question of time-off rules, Mr. Riley notes that the rules were written by Congress, not the FRA. 
In addition, he says, the issue wasn't relevant to the accident because the Conrail engineer had been off more than 49 hours before the crash, and the brakeman more than 38 hours. 
The accident occurred an hour and 15 minutes into their duty. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
