ID: 253	RANK: 71	SCORE: 13.274938
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871123-0032 </DOCNO>
<HL> Railroads Confront Unions on Crew Size
---
Workers Resist Cutbacks
As Showdown Nears
---
By Daniel Machalaba
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR CSX CNW BNI
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<DATELINE> CINCINNATI  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Guy Johnson, a CSX Corp. brakeman, eyes a mile of coal cars that stretch behind the diesel locomotive he is riding. 

   He watches for sparks, smoke and other signs of impending derailment, but another peril preoccupies his thoughts. 
"Brakemen are an endangered species," he says. 
"I'm just waiting for the ax to fall." 

   His employer, CSX's Transportation Inc. unit, seeks to cut 12,000 jobs, about 30% of its work force, including many brakemen considered surplus. 
The railroad is urging rail unions to make sweeping changes in labor practices. 
In return, the carrier would give bonuses linked to gains in productivity. 

   Though its cutbacks may be the most ambitious, CSX isn't the only railroad trying to prune workers. 
The rail units of CNW Corp. and Burlington Northern Inc. have confronted their unions with plans to reduce train-crew size. 
Some railroads are leasing locomotives, using contract labor and selling surplus track to circumvent their unions. 

   Such moves, fiercely resisted by rail unions, point to a showdown when management and labor meet next spring to negotiate a new three-year contract. "1988 will be the most important year we've ever faced," says Fred Hardin, president of the the United Transportation Union. 
"It's obvious that railroads want to cut a tremendous number of employees." 

   Railroads say their survival is at stake. 
The high price of railroad labor, which accounts for 46% of the industry's costs, makes the rails increasingly uncompetitive with trucks. 
"There's no way we can salvage the business without these changes," says John Sweeney, a senior vice president of CSX Transportation. 

   Labor says it is being unfairly blamed for rail industry woes. 
"Railroads are slowing, not reversing, their decline by squeezing employees," says Brian Freeman, financial adviser to the Railway Labor Executives' Association, which represents rail unions. 
He argues that the railroads' main problems are a shrinkage over the past decade of their heavy industrial customers and traffic diversions to trucks, which offer superior service. 

   Major railroads have slashed employment -- to 295,000 last year from 459,000 in 1980 -- reflecting buy-outs, attrition, mergers, abandonments and technological advances. 
But the industry is still overmanned by 30%, estimates Robert Logan, a vice president of United Parcel Service of America Inc., a major rail shipper. 
"Railroads have made incremental gains, but there's room for huge leaps," Mr. Logan says. 

   Since 1980, railroads have spent or reserved nearly $2 billion pretax to fund early retirement and voluntary severance programs. 
But such efforts generally stop short of tackling the industry's labor practices, which have hampered management for decades. 
Many of the industry's workers adhere to rigid job classifications, are governed by strict work rules and are protected by job guarantees. 

   For example, some 200 clerks with lifetime job protection but no work to do report daily to offices of Burlington Northern Railroad to qualify for annual salaries of about $35,000. 
They got their entitlements in the early 1970s, and in return the railroad's predecessors won from the union the right to merge their systems. 
The protected clerks usually spend their shifts conversing, playing cards or watching television. 
To break the monotony, some of them, with Burlington Northern's encouragement, have used their shift to raise funds for the United Way. 

   Most freight trains still have four men aboard, double what the industry says is needed on many runs. 
In addition to the engineer and conductor, there usually are two brakemen, who got their name when railroads still used hand brakes. 
Railroads are seeking to eliminate many of their brakemen, including Mr. Johnson, who rode the CSX train in Cincinnati to watch for mechanical failures. 

   Track-side devices, far more sensitive than the human eye, have made that job obsolete, railroad managers say. 
But rail workers argue that freight train delays would worsen and safety would suffer if crews were cut. 
"Sometimes the brakemen don't do a lick of work between Cincinnati and Louisville," says Kent McCoskey, a CSX engineer. 
"But other times they're stomping that ballast all day in the rain or snow, hunting for broken drawbars, busted air hoses and even a derailed car." 
The railroads acknowledge that one brakeman is needed on certain freight trains, but they contend that no brakemen are needed on many long-haul runs, such as the coal train that Mr. Johnson rode. 

   While the elimination of featherbedding is a major target for rail management, unions want to improve working conditions. 
They clamor for regular work schedules for many freight train crewmen who are on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
Workers complain they must stay close to a telephone when off duty because employees who repeatedly miss calls face suspension. 

   "I was scratched off the social lists of my friends many years ago," says A. Darrel Sams, a CSX engineer and a local chairman of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, who blames his divorce seven years ago partly on his erratic work schedule. 
"My wife decided there had to be a better way to live," he says. 

   CSX's Mr. Sweeney says that in exchange for big work-force reductions, the railroad is willing to pay bonuses for productivity gains and offer more regular assignments for employees who remain. 

   Though CSX is pursuing a cooperative approach, other railroads are preparing to confront labor. 
"We're training managers to handle our trains," says James Wolfe, president of CNW, which has notified its unions of plans to eliminate brakemen on freight trains. 
But federal railroad laws discourage such solutions. 
Even if CNW is able to weather a strike, rail unions have the right to extend picketing to other railroads, turning a local dispute into a national issue and inviting federal intervention. 

   For example, Congress settled the two-month strike at Guilford Transportation Industries Inc. in 1986 on terms favorable to labor. 
But Guilford, a closely held New England railroad system, has since transferred much of its system to Springfield Terminal, an obscure subsidiary in Springfield, Vt., that has flexible work practices and low wages. 

   "We found a different way to reach the same end," says F. Colin Pease, a Guilford vice president. 
Guilford has encountered setbacks recently, though. 
The Interstate Commerce Commission, heeding the pleas of rail labor, temporarily blocked the lease of some Guilford operations to Springfield Terminal. 
And recently, rail workers represented by the United Transportation Union struck Springfield Terminal, alleging safety problems, but the carrier was able to resume reduced service using supervisors and nonunion workers. 

   Jeffrey Zeh, president of the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees, says Springfield Terminal is "just a subterfuge, a scam," to avoid Guilford's labor contracts. 
Other unions are furious at Burlington Northern. 
That carrier has leased locomotive power from an outside source that uses low-cost labor to maintain the engines. 

   Rail labor is battling in the courts to block major railroads from splitting off large sections of light-density track to new short-line and regional railroads. 
The new lines generally operate with fewer workers, lower wages and fewer work rules. 
The unions are also lobbying Congress for legislation that would require job protection for workers who are displaced by such sales. 

   What's more, rail unions charge that the chief purpose of some of the transactions is to create low-wage captives, not to save endangered rail links. 
They point to Montana Rail Link, which is leasing more than 800 miles of track from Burlington Northern. 
Though the railroad line functions, as it did before, as a mainline route for Burlington Northern trains through Montana and Idaho, Montana Rail Link has the right to operate with smaller crews and without the work rules that burden major railroads. 

   Montana Rail Link officials bristle at union critics. 
"This isn't a sham at all," says William Brodsky, president of Montana Rail Link. 
"It's a smart business practice, and one that is necessary if major railroads are to stay in the railroad business long term." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
