ID: 253	RANK: 74	SCORE: 13.200691
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870706-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Peering Into the Past,
Train Buffs Venerate
Ghost of a Railroad
---
O&amp;W Hauled Coal and Fish
To Mountain Settlements
Of a Very Different Era
---
By Daniel Machalaba
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<DATELINE> MAYFIELD, Pa.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Peter Barton has gone out today to trace the remains of the dearly departed. 

   On an overcast day in this old railroad town, he parks his Jeep in the junkyard near Cemetery Street and heads into the woods. 
Rounding a turn on the path, he comes to a sudden stop. 
Before him, deep in undergrowth, lie the rusted hulks of four ancient railroad baggage cars and coaches. 
Seedlings sprout from their roofs. 

   "We're too late to save them," Mr. Barton says with a sigh. 
"There's no hope." 

   His sadness at the cars' condition is tempered by a sense of fulfillment, though. 
He is part of the Ontario &amp; Western Railway Historical Society, a group whose members' fascination with a long-vanished railroad is such that even in the rarefied world of the railroad buff, their tastes seem a bit exotic. 
In the forest today, Mr. Barton has felt the thrill of peering into the past. 

   The Ontario &amp; Western wasn't like today's railroads. 
Its noisy steam engines and antiquated wooden cars rumbled through mountain tunnels and over high trestles to isolated rural settlements of New York and Pennsylvania. 
It went to little towns that had helped pay to build it, not to places that made economic sense, and it always had to struggle to break even. 
But before it finally succumbed 30 years ago, the O&amp;W won a spot in the region's history, picking up the milk and delivering the coal, carrying passengers in some of its cars and, in others, milk cans full of live trout to restock rivers. 
The O&amp;W's world is, indeed, an era past. 

   That's what draws its devotees. 
"Some guys go through jungles to find traces of the Mayan civilization," says Carl Ohlson, another buff. 
"Our challenge is to find traces of the O&amp;W." 

   For some of the society's 500 members, the quest is almost mystical. 
They go out in ones and twos to drive or walk along long-abandoned track bed, pausing at what remains of bridges and depots to silently let their imaginations roam. 

   "When I look down that right of way, my heart stops," says Herbert Heidt. 
"I get a weak, washed-out feeling." 
Mr. Heidt and his wife live in Wurtsboro, N.Y., a Catskill Mountain town the O&amp;W served. 
Their house is the old railroad depot. 

   John Pavelchak, 46, of Nutley, N.J., keeps vigil on important O&amp;W dates. 
Last March 29, the 30th anniversary of the road's death, he lit a salvaged O&amp;W kerosene lantern and watched several hours of old movies of O&amp;W steam trains. 
"It was a sad day," he says. 
Other times, Mr. Pavelchak lights a lantern in his car (painted the maroon and orange of a defunct passenger train) and goes driving along the right of way, striving to "get the feel and smell of the railroad." 

   Far away in San Diego, Calif., Paul Lubliner makes his pilgrimages by fantasy. 
He puts pictures of the trains under a powerful magnifier, then imagines himself "climbing into the scene." 
Though he is just 33 and has only the vaguest memory of the railroad, he is a committed train buff, and he says the O&amp;W's passing "is a very grievous personal loss to me." 
He adds, "I think of it several times a day." 

   Perhaps surprisingly, most of the O&amp;W followers aren't old-timers who once worked for the road. 
Many are people in their 30s or 40s who have only childhood memories of its whistle and smoke. 
And some of the most devout are too young to have known the railroad at all. 

   They often say they are inspired by tales of the O&amp;W's long struggle for survival. 
Psychologists have their theories about the O&amp;W's lure, too, having to do with the mystery of the past, the yearning to get in touch with roots, and the ease of fantasizing about a thing that isn't here anymore and can never change. 

   "These people are making more out of it than it was," suggests William Helmer, a retired English professor in Morrisville, N.Y., who wrote an early book about the railroad. 
Jim Boyd, the editor of a train magazine called Railfan, goes further, declaring that "it's a pure fantasy trip. 
The O&amp;W was a stupid, comic-book railroad that never should have been built." 

   Yet for the most part the O&amp;W buffs are interested not in romantic tales of dubious authenticity but in precise details -- where an abutment stood, when it was rebuilt, and so on. 
As a devotee named Ken Kreitner wrote in Trains magazine, referring to the O&amp;W by one of its nicknames: "There are plenty of cute little railroads around, but none holds the fascination of the Old Woman. 
There is a mystique around the O&amp;W, and I think it is the mystery of death." 

   The railroad was the idea of a 19th-century politician in Oswego, N.Y., who saw it as a way to make that Lake Ontario port more important. 
To finance the line -- first called the Oswego Midland -- he offered depots to towns that would float bonds to help pay for it. 
The plan was shortsighted. 
When the important city of Syracuse refused, for instance, he passed it by, to the railroad's detriment. 
And the line never got near New York City except indirectly over leased track. 

   Winding through the Catskill Mountains, the railroad needed many tunnels and trestles. 
Construction ran so far over budget that it had no sooner been completed in 1873 than it fell into bankruptcy. 
Emerging in 1880, it was rechristened the New York, Ontario &amp; Western. 
There were times when it did all right hauling coal from Scranton, Pa., and taking passengers to Catskills resorts. 
But as times changed, the O&amp;W fell into a long decline that ended in 1957. 

   The depots and track bed and abutments now are overgrown and ghostly, and, to O&amp;W followers, objects of fascination. 
Among these people, searching out the vanishing remnants of the O&amp;W is known as "chasing the Old Woman's skirts." 

   Doing that in his car one day, Mr. Pavelchak followed the former track bed across a golf course, to the angry shouts of golfers. 
Another enthusiast, Ernest Barry, tried to sneak onto the grounds of a state prison in Napanoch, N.Y., to photograph a former depot. 
A prison guard cut him off, but later the O&amp;W Society won permission to take one of its right-of-way bus tours to the site. 

   At another stop on that tour, a crumbling depot at Summitville, N.Y., members got down on their hands and knees and sifted through dirt, broken glass and sheep manure for artifacts. 
All they found were a couple of old lead boxcar seals. 
Luck was better at High Falls, N.Y. Digging under the edge of the former station there, Richard Hover, a computer operator from Highland, N.Y., uncovered a 1941 O&amp;W freight waybill listing a "bundle of wood trellis" bound from Cincinnati to High Falls. 
"I love it. 
I'm making out like a bandit today," he exclaims. 

   Members of the O&amp;W Society hold monthly meetings in Middletown, N.Y., which was the railroad's headquarters, where they look at old photos and homemade movies of the trains. 
"This does to us what rock music does to kids," says Allan Seebach Jr., 29, during one such evening. 
"It juices us up. 
This is better than drugs any day." 

   The film shows a steam engine rounding a bend. 
On the soundtrack, Barbra Streisand sings of "the way we were." 
Says Mr. Pavelchak: "It's about this time that I start slobbering." 

   As the railroad recedes in time, some fans are intent on saving remnants. 
David Ackerman, of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., says he retired at 41 to devote more time to preservation. 
Richard Reit has 90 feet of track and a crossing signal in his front yard near Otselic, N.Y., where he sometimes wears a conductor's uniform to greet visitors. 
At Roscoe, N.Y., Wilmer Sipple has built an O&amp;W museum in a caboose and is trying to re-create a metal trout car of the sort the railroad eventually used instead of milk cans for hauling live fish. 

   Now and then, artifacts are sold at auction. 
Mr. Lubliner says he has spent nearly $3,000 to buy pieces of the O&amp;W, including the tail sign of a train that was once its pride, the Mountaineer. 
"You go without food for this stuff," he says. 

   Even as physical traces of the O&amp;W slip away, the ranks of its former employees keep thinning. 
Whenever the O&amp;W Society learns of such a death, it sends a card to the bereaved. 
On it is a picture of a steam train chugging over weedy track, with a verse that ends, "I'll highball into heaven on the Ontario Western line." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
