ID: 253	RANK: 88	SCORE: 12.816793
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871221-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> In Wake of Cost Cuts, Many Firms
Sweep Their History Out the Door
---
By Frederick Rose
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "History is more or less bunk," Henry Ford once said. 
And a good number of companies now appear to be taking him at his word. 

   Corporate archives -- the thousands of documents that chronicle a firm's history -- are being swept out the company doors. 
In an era of cost cuts and restructurings, the logic is all too simple: Papers take space and must be filed; filing takes clerks and archivists; clerks and archivists cost money. 
As a result, a recent, promising corporate interest in archives and history is rapidly abating. 

   "There's no question that the recent wave of corporate mergers, acquisitions and restructurings has endangered the heritage of a number of corporations," says Glen Porter, executive director of the Hagley Foundation, a library in Wilmington, Del., that specializes in corporate history. 

   Even when collections aren't destroyed but instead are donated to universities or shuffled to a warehouse, the papers aren't always properly maintained. 
And, more importantly, they are no longer supplemented by the company's most recent memos, correspondence and reports. 

   Admittedly, musty copies of the chairman's speeches, faded engineering drawings and the arcana of corporate committees generally make dull reading. 
To historians and to companies themselves, however, they can be vital. 
"Just as if you were studying political history, you want to know what . . . people did, and what the circumstances were when they did it," says Alfred Chandler, Straus Professor of Business History at Harvard University. 
"You can only learn these from original memos and correspondence." 

   Analysis of General Motors Corp.'s early management, for instance, taught outsiders about decentralizing corporate controls. 
Studies of Du Pont Co. have improved strategies on research and development. 
And internally, corporate legal departments often find old company papers important. 
Wells Fargo &amp; Co. was once confronted with a $480 million suit alleging that it had misappropriated an idea to start a credit-card operation. 
Using materials from the bank's archives dating back to the 1960s, lawyers were able to prove that Wells Fargo had developed the idea itself. 

   Still, in many cases, "it's very hard to measure the contribution of an archive to the bottom line of a company," notes Philip Mooney, manager of the archives department at Coca-Cola Co. and co-chairman of the business archives section of the Society of American Archivists. 

   That problem came to a head at JWT Group Inc. in October. 
Squeezed by diminishing business and the cost-cutting efforts of its parent company in London, the advertising concern decided it couldn't afford to maintain the vast archives of its J. Walter Thompson unit -- a prized collection of millions of documents and advertisements dating back more than a century. 

   Determined to preserve this cross-section of American culture, JWT's archivist, Cynthia Swank, and others arranged for the collection -- including early public-opinion polls, decades of analysis of household purchasing patterns and founder J. Walter Thompson's own umbrella -- to be shipped to Duke University in Durham, N.C. There, the bulk of it will be open to the public. 

   Other corporate collections, however, haven't fared as well. 

   Atlantic Richfield Co., on a cost-cutting binge a couple of years ago, moved documents relating to such historic predecessor companies as Atlantic Refining Co., an important oil and gas marketer, and Anaconda Co., a major mining concern, to a stack of boxes in the back of its corporate library. 
Previously, the files had been coddled under special lights in the climate-controlled rooms of a formal archive. 

   Details of Firestone Corp.'s past -- a wide variety of corporate memos, reports and correspondence -- now lie in cartons at the University of Akron, where they were sent last year. 
There are plans for the university to organize the material -- but "if you went looking for anything now, you'd be rummaging around in a lot of musty boxes," says a company spokesman. 

   Records left lying about or stuffed in boxes without professional upkeep soon become useless, experts say. 
Documents disappear from collections that aren't monitored, and a jumble of cartons inhibits researchers. 
"If you can't retrieve the information, there's no reason to have it," says Bara Levin, archivist at New York's Lincoln Center and formerly the archivist at Chemical Bank, which closed its archives to the public last year and stopped professional archive operations. 

   Company archives are a relatively small item in corporate budgets -- Arco's top-of-the-line program cost about $400,000 a year -- but they are easy targets for cost-cutters. 
They are often mistakenly thought to duplicate the functions of a regular company library. 
And they are sometimes located near senior management offices, making them highly visible to budget-conscious executives. 

   Annamarie Sandecki, former archivist at N.W. Ayer Inc., remembers feeling exposed on an executive floor. 
"The chairman used to go by every day and look in as he passed," Ms. Sandecki recalls. 
The ax fell last July, when the 118-year old advertising agency told Ms. Sandecki that the archives -- including voluminous memos and reports about the company's ad campaigns -- would no longer be professionally maintained. 

   Ms. Sandecki, who was dismissed, recalls fighting to save the papers. 
"I had to work very hard to keep them from being thrown out," she says. 
A company spokesman insists that "there was no interest in repudiating this company's past." 
But even though the archives today are open to employees, few of the papers are being updated and cataloged. 
At some point, N.W. Ayer hopes to hire a part-time archivist, the spokesman says. 

   Worse than unattended documents, archivists say, are documents that are lost or destroyed -- whether by design or by accident during corporate house-cleanings. 
Baldwin Locomotive Works -- once one of the nation's largest producers of railroad steam locomotives -- many years ago jettisoned old design documents, including some complete engineering plans for steam engines dating to the 1850s, says Henry Rentschler, president of what today is the Baldwin-Hamilton Co. 

   When available, such detailed engineering records offer students of industrial development and strategy a rare glimpse at the past and future evolution of technology. 
"That's particularly important during this era of economic and manufacturing alignment," notes Walter Gray, a curator at the California State Railroad Museum in Sacramento, Calif. 

   Frequently, history just walks out the door. 
Employees who have been dismissed often take their memories with them. 
At Phillips Petroleum Co., where restructuring has slashed payrolls, officials weren't able to answer a recent inquiry about a national sky-writing campaign that the company ran for many years. 
Current employees knew nothing about it. 

   To avoid such losses, Wells Fargo uses its elaborate archive to prepare histories of various banking and credit services. 
The histories, in turn, are used to brief an everchanging roster of managers, helping them to avoid past pitfalls. 
"It's an important form of management education," says Harold P. Anderson, vice president and general manager of the history department at Wells Fargo. 

   "You don't need archives for sentimental reasons, but because, in business, turnover is swift and memory is short," says George David Smith, president of Winthrop Group Inc., Cambridge, Mass.-based consultants on corporate history and archives. 

   In many cases, lawyers advise that most records be thrown out swiftly. 
At General Tire, for instance, company policy has long required that most documents be destroyed after two years. 

   Harvard's Mr. Chandler warns that such policies, carried to an extreme, will obliterate vital details of American industry. 
"Lawyers," he says "are the enemies of history." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
