ID: 257	RANK: 10	SCORE: 21.397060
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870930-0135 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Fighting Over Fossils and the Family Tree
---
By Edward Dolnick</HL>
<DD> 09/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Roger Lewin's contention in "Bones of Contention: Controversies in the Search for Human Origins" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 348 pages, $19.95) is that paleoanthropology -- the study of how human beings originated -- is the oddest of all sciences. 

   It is more controversial than other fields, more dominated by personality, more strongly shaped by preconceptions. 
In part, the problem is that we are telling our own story, and studying one's family tree can be an emotional business. 

   There is also the difficulty of trying to study what happened only once, millions of years ago. 
Worse yet, Mr. Lewin observes, there are "a limited number of fossil sites available to work, and a still pitifully small inventory of fossils to analyze." 

   Mr. Lewin is a well-regarded editor at Science magazine. 
He calls his book a "modest oral history" of paleoanthropology, but his theme, in a phrase he uses to describe a particular controversy, is "how very unscientific the process of scientific inquiry sometimes can be." 

   To begin with, fossil hunters need to be lucky. 
A researcher can spend a lifetime searching for fossils and never find a single one. 
Paleoanthropology has the peculiar feature, along with theology and the study of life in outer space, two prominent scientists once wrote, that there are "more practitioners than objects for study." 

   If a scientist does make a find, then, it is hard to assess it coolly and dispassionately. 
"With the emotional elements of adventure, sacrifice and reward all compounded in the discovery of a new fossil, together with the soul-stirring aspects of ancestor worship, it might seem that the odds are heavily stacked against an objective analysis," Mr. Lewin argues. 

   That makes for a lot of nasty fun, as Mr. Lewin leads us through a century of "bone fights." 
The first fossils of 35,000-year-old Neanderthal man, for example, were assigned by one expert to a Cossack who had chased Napoleon back across the Rhine in 1814. 

   The problem is that fossils don't speak for themselves, or don't speak clearly. 
"Virtually all our theories about human origins were relatively unconstrained by fossil data," says Harvard anthropologist David Pilbeam. 
"The theories are . . . fossil-free or in some cases even fossil-proof." 

   Mr. Lewin's tale begins and ends in the present, with an intellectual Punch and Judy show that features arch rivals Richard Leakey and Donald Johanson. 
Their dispute centers on the shape of our family tree and on how long ago our first recognizable ancestors appeared. 

   Mr. Johanson soared to fame after discovering the famous Lucy skeleton in Ethiopia in 1974. 
The skeleton is 40% complete, which is unprecedented, and is from a near-human who lived some 3.5 million years ago. 
Mr. Johanson is a showman in the Carl Sagan mode, described by a colleague as looking like "a nail polish salesman, wearing Yves Saint Laurent pants and Gucci sneakers." 

   Richard Leakey cuts just as conspicuous a figure. 
A "famous son of that superstar family of African prehistory," in Mr. Lewin's words, Mr. Leakey made the cover of Time magazine, and crowed that sales of his issues were "bigger even than the one with Cheryl Tiegs." 

   Mr. Lewin was the co-author, with Mr. Leakey, of two popular accounts of prehistory. 
He plays fair here, though, and Mr. Johanson comes across as favorably as Mr. Leakey. 
"Bones of Contention" is not gossip, in any case. 
It is serious intellectual history. 

   Mr. Lewin recounts, for instance, the famous Piltdown Man hoax of 1912, in which someone planted bones from an orangutan's jaw and a modern human's skull in an English gravel pit. 
The bones were dug up and widely hailed as having come from a prehistoric man. 

   The hoax endured 40 years. 
The story is usually told as a whodunit, but Mr. Lewin contends that the important question is "how trained men, the greatest experts of their day" were taken in. 
The answer is that the Piltdown bones fit perfectly with current theory. 
British anthropologists believed, for example, that evolution modified the body piecemeal rather than as a whole, so that the combination of a large, humanlike cranium and an apelike jaw was to be expected. 

   One overriding pattern, which Mr. Lewin details in case after case, is that "on the one hand, you {the fossil finder} exaggerate the differences between your fossil and modern humans, thus getting for yourself a nice, ancient, discrete ancestor. 
And on the other, you overlook the differences and exaggerate the similarities, thus setting your fossil on the threshold of the noble Homo sapiens." 

   That is not done consciously. 
Nor does Mr. Lewin claim that scientific judgments sway helplessly in the breeze of academic fashion. 
Science is different from other fields, after all, in that it does make progress. 
A college freshman knows more physics than did Galileo. 

   What Mr. Lewin does show, elegantly, is the "power of preconceptions." 
Scientists can look at the same evidence and see different things, because they are looking at the world through different lenses. 

   ---
   Mr. Dolnick writes about science from Chevy Chase, Md. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
