ID: 257	RANK: 22	SCORE: 11.683560
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870218-0133 </DOCNO>
<HL> Education Among the Cro-Magnons
---
By Vermont Royster</HL>
<DD> 02/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   More than all the anthropologists and archaeologists combined, Jean Auel has given her thousands of readers a feeling for the humanity of our primitive ancestors, who, like us, are the species called Homo sapiens sapiens. 
Her three novels -- "The Clan of the Cave Bear," "The Valley of the Horses" and "The Mammoth Hunters" -- have all been durable best sellers. 

   And justly so. 
For she has not only done her research well on the lives of those we call Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons, she also has the creative imagination of a first-class storyteller. 
She has thus earned the respect of academicians and the devotion of ordinary readers. 
Once begun on her tales, you cannot set them aside. 

   They enchant because they mix history, adventure, a haunting love story and a fascinating picture of the daily lives of people like us who lived in the millennia before written history. 
You may glimpse how life was then in exhibitions such as the one at the American Museum of Natural History. 
Jean Auel puts flesh on the bones and makes them come alive. 

   There are so many facets to those lives, as to our own, that each reader's eye will be caught by different facets. 
For me, reading her recalled among other things a thought from Will Durant's "The Story of Civilization." 
Early in his history he remarks that the chief difference between man and beast lies in education, and that education was a primary concern of primitive peoples. 
He also observed that in early society most economic advances were made by women rather than men. 

   You will find both these themes running through the Auel stories. 
Education was necessary so that each generation did not have to begin anew but could build upon the learning of those before. 
In the Auel stories this education was first of all technological. 
How to make flint axes, knives and spear points. 
How to cure skins to make clothes for the unprotected bodies of humans. 
How to make fire. 
How among growing things to distinguish the edible from the poisonous, to recognize the herbs that seemed to have some medicinal usefulness. 

   Since there was no written language, all this had to be taught person to person by signs or spoken language, which also had to be learned. 
Since there were no schoolmasters or classrooms, the young had to learn from elders within the family or clan. 
Children were welcomed everywhere, some to learn from the carver of flint, some from the spear-throwing hunter, all from the mother at her hearth. 
And the foundation of all was language, the basic tool of learning. 

   But the education was not only technological, though without that technological learning begun long ago we would not today have all our technical marvels. 
Also taught was the culture of the tribe, the story of its past, the customs of daily living, the manners required between young and old. 
Children also learned a reverence for the mysteries of life, what we would call religion, and a respect for the bounties of nature. 

   Reading all this, I couldn't help reflecting on education then and now. 
There are many similarities. 
Much of education today, too, is technological, and the best of it is superb -- otherwise we would not have seen men walking on the moon. 
Our education also is transmitted from the old to the young, each generation building on its predecessors. 

   There are also differences. 
In our times, most teaching is by hired teachers, not by father to son, mother to daughter. 
Rarely is the hearth the main teaching place. 
Mostly this is better. 
Our accumulated knowledge is so vast that no parent can know all the child should be taught; here, as elsewhere, our society has to expand the division of labor if it is to progress from generation to generation. 
Without our formal educational system we could not sustain our complex society, much less hope for it to progress. 

   Still, not all is better. 
Our educational system turns out too many children who cannot use the language to read, write or even speak articulately. 
Many of our young are not much more comfortable with numbers than those Cro-Magnons who could count no higher than 10. 
That surely is one of the reasons why, amid all our progress and plenty, there are so many we call "disadvantaged" because they are unable to cope amid the complexities of modern life. 

   There is another loss, I think, amid our progress. 
At least in American society (though not always elsewhere), the ties among generations have been loosened. 
How could it be otherwise in a society where so many are "latchkey" children, gathered with their elders only to eat and sleep? 
The loss is in the transmission of culture and custom, not to mention our history and even the legends that have shaped our country. 
It's appalling to meet young people in college with little knowledge of our forefathers or of the ideas they used to build this country. 

   As for religion, we do not even permit it in our public schools. 
No feeling is handed down that there is a guiding force in the universe (give it what name you will) that is due reverence or wonder. 
Is it surprising, then, that in our time there is so little restraint on behavior, that our streets are not safe to walk upon, or that we plunder nature for present pleasure with so little thought of what we do tomorrow? 

   In comparing present time with times past there is always, of course, the danger of a romantic fallacy. 
It has been a long journey for our species from its primitive, and often brutish, beginnings. 
It is a journey we alone of all animals have been able to take. 
That is our pride and our glory as human beings. 

   All the same, it's chastening to our modern pride to be reminded, as Jean Auel reminds us, that this human journey began some 30 millennia past, in the dark of the Ice Age. 
And how in the beginning, while men were perforce out hunting, women built the foundations for civilization. 

   And especially to discover that, in educating new generations, there is something to be learned from those primitive Cro-Magnons in that long, long ago. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
