ID: 257	RANK: 98	SCORE: 7.716926
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870731-0133 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Pols vs. Hercules in Olympia
---
By Susan G. Hauser</HL>
<DD> 07/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Olympia, Wash.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The question is, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, does Hercules really do all those nasty things to ladies and animals? 

   Legislators at the Washington State Capitol think so, and that's why they voted five years ago to put plywood and draperies over William Spafford's unfinished murals, "Twelve Labors of Hercules." 
Mr. Spafford is a Seattle artist. 
He painted the murals on the walls of the state legislature's chambers. 

   Mr. Spafford said the gray silhouettes in his pictures are engaged in battle, not kinky sex. 
He added that he saw them as metaphors for the political process. 
That's why he and Alden Mason, whose murals decorate the Senate chambers, filed suit against the State of Washington to prevent removal of their work and to force the state to honor the terms of their 1980 contracts. 

   Although both artists' murals were installed in 1981, House members moved quickly to hide Mr. Spafford's half-finished murals from their sight. 
Sheets of plywood were nailed over the offending scenes, then heavy drapes were hung to cover the unsightly plywood. 
Actual removal of the murals was to be accomplished at a later date. 

   Mr. Mason was allowed to finish his murals, which illustrate an Indian quotation about the wonders of Nature. 
The paintings hung unchallenged until April 3 of this year, when the Senate voted to emulate the House and remove Mr. Mason's art from the walls. 

   Mr. Spafford has been a professor of art at the University of Washington in Seattle since 1963. 
Mr. Mason was on the university's art faculty for 30 years until his retirement seven years ago. 
In 1980 a blue-ribbon jury selected the two men from competing artists to decorate the walls of the House and Senate chambers. 

   Only two of Mr. Spafford's four murals were installed when legislators, shocked by what they viewed as obscene and unnatural acts, voted in March 1982 to board up the murals and rescind Mr. Spafford's $80,000 contract. 
The artist was paid a fee to cover his studio rental costs. 

   Mr. Mason's murals enjoyed greater longevity, remaining on the walls of the Senate chambers nearly six years before the senators decided that his abstract, mosaiclike painting clashed with the august atmosphere of their chambers. 
The senators also complained that the muted pastel colors of Mr. Mason's murals did not match the color scheme being used for a million-dollar redecorating project of the state Capitol in time for Washington's centennial celebration in 1989. 

   However, redecoration work has been stalled because other artists hired for the project are refusing to continue work until the mural controversy is settled. 
Seattle artist Jacob Lawrence, for example, has said he will not work any further on his mosaic paintings for the Capitol Rotunda until the safety of the murals is assured. 

   Criticism of the Washington lawmakers as "visual cripples of the worst kind," in Mr. Mason's words, is not really fair. 
Not all of them voted to remove the murals. 
Democratic Sen. Jim McDermott of Seattle, who voted against removal of the murals, insists there is a mural majority of art lovers who oppose the "Neanderthal thinking" that allowed the anti-mural votes. 

   The main culprit, in his view, is Sen. Ted Bottiger, a Tacoma Democrat, who led the Senate campaign to remove the murals. 

   "Bottiger's the one who stirred it up," said Mr. McDermott. 
"He mobilized all the Neanderthal thinking. 
He's resigning at the end of this term, so his last act is to tear all the art off the walls." 

   But the argument of Mr. Bottiger, who has been a state senator for 22 years, is that the legislators are the tenants of the building and should have control over how the place is decorated. 

   "Look at it this way," he said. 
"If you were renting a piece of property and the landlord came in and painted all your walls red, wouldn't you be upset?" 

   The artists' case against the state will come to trial Sept. 29. 
Until then, a preliminary injunction granted July 10 in King County Superior Court will prevent removal of the murals. 

   The artists are being represented by Frederick Mendoza of Seattle, who is volunteering his services, and art law expert Leonard DuBoff of Portland, Ore., whose fees are being paid by public donations to Allied Arts of Seattle and Artist Trust. 
Money is also being raised through sales of buttons that read "Art Outlives Politics." 

   Mr. DuBoff said he will argue that the murals are site-specific and that their removal is tantamount to destruction. 
He noted similarities to the Richard Serra case in New York. 

   Mr. Serra, whose 73-ton, 12-by-120-foot metal sculpture "Tilted Arc" bisects Federal Plaza in front of the Jacob K. Javits Federal Building, is suing the federal government to prevent its removal. 
Commissioned as part of the General Service Administration's Art-in-Architecture program, the sculpture has drawn complaints since its installment in 1981, mostly from local office workers who have to walk its 120-foot length to pass it. 
Mr. Serra's argument is that "Tilted Arc" would not be suitable in any other location except the one for which it was made. 

   Mr. DuBoff feels that the site-specific defense is even more cogent in the Washington Capitol case, especially in reference to Mr. Mason's murals, because the artist had to fit one panel around a clock on the wall, and make allowances for a one-inch recession of the wall on another section. 

   "There's no other place in the world the murals would fit," said Mr. DuBoff. 
"This is the West Coast version of the Serra case. 
If anything, our case is better than Serra's." 

   ---
   Ms. Hauser is a free-lance writer in Portland, Ore. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
