ID: 118	RANK: 61	SCORE: 7.427998

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06112089 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06112089 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (11); Photos by Alice Baldwin, Peter L. Gould, Barbara J. Rosen, Images
Presss; PHOTO: Images Press; Johnson's designs included stretch velvet pants,
above, and a yes-we-can-can black ruffled outfit, below (color); PHOTO:
Carolyne Roehm shows a fit-and-flare silhouette -- slimmer than a trapeze,
roomier than a shift. (color); PHOTO: This Lauren Sera catsuit with hood has
dash for the daring. (color); PHOTO: The comfy look: An oversize Anne Klein
cardigan worn over tights. (color); PHOTO: Stop your hemming and hawing:
Christian Francis Roth's skirt skimmed ankles, but this year, all lengths are
in (color); PHOTO: Indian totem poles set the pace for this Isaac Mizrahi
gown. (color); PHOTO: Formal dances with wolves: Mizrahi's beaded cocktail
dress. (color); PHOTO: Drop-dead Hollywood glamour is back in the spotlight
with this slinky strapless gown from Bob Mackie. (color); PHOTO: Anne Klein's
all-in-one 'pant boots' are fun -- but probably pricey (color); Anne Klein
pairs a zip-front jacket and a skirt. (color); PHOTO: (fashion model)  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  FASHION; TREND  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  IF YOU'RE looking for one word to sum up fall's fashion offerings from
American designers, it would be options.  Aside from agreeing on a few items
-- from a plethora of plaids to a trunk full of turtlenecks -- designers are
hedging their bets with lots of variety. At recent formal showings in New
York, there was no single hem length, dress shape, jacket silhouette or color.
 Fearful of dictating a single look women might reject -- thus depressing
sales that are already down -- manufacturers are offering enough choices so
that if one look isn't flattering to your age or figure, another is sure to
be.  For once, women are in the driver's seat. So enjoy the variety, consider
whether you want to wear your pants skinny or full and which hemline is most
flattering. If in doubt, let the mirror be your guide.  On this page and on
Page 8L, you'll find specifics on the different categories of fall looks.  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Living  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  YOU'RE IN CHARGE
THIS SEASON THE ONLY RIGHT LOOK IS THE ONE
THAT'S RIGHT FOR YOU  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  Fall Fashion Preview  </MEMO>
<TEXT>  EVENING; THEY ONLY COME OUT AT NIGHT;    AFTER dark, you can shimmy in
sequins, glow in gold, vamp in velvet, look lovely in lace or chic in
chiffon.;    Designers are offering plenty of choices -- knowing that if a
woman is going to splurge in one area it's likely to be evening wear.;    The
newest look is lace -- overlays or simply layers of lace create bare or
prim-and-proper effects. Most striking are couplings of two different colors,
such as gold over black or white over navy.;    Metallic fabrics are equally
hot -- Donna  Karan's evening pieces are like liquid gold, while Calvin
Klein's matte silver, gold and copper are subtle and sophisticated.;   
Chiffon and velvet, perennial fashion favorites, are updated for the '90s.
Chiffon is sometimes draped, used as an insert, used as a base for lace or
simply floats as the final touch to a complete ensemble. Velvet's new look is
a stretchy one.;    As for sequins and beads, they're back in full force, most
often in very simple T-shirt or sleeveless shift styles that allow the beauty
of all-over sequins to shine.;    Counter-balancing these classic evening
fabrics are some traditional daytime materials. It may be a dark flannel with
a slice of sheer point d'esprit; a nubby plaid with metallic threads; or a
long, navy blazer with a short chiffon or lace skirt.;    No matter what the
medium, the message often emphasizes the shoulder via portrait collars,
off-the-shoulder or strapless tops or single shoulder treatments.;    Other
key silhouettes are long, column dresses; bodice-fitted gowns that flare at
the skirt; asymmetrical hems above the knee in front and trailing behind; and
short T-shirt dresses.; PANTS; TIGHT AND TAPERED LEGGINGS;    KEY pant
components for fall are skinny, stretch, stirrup, straight or short.;    For
this, you can thank the popularity of leggings. Designers take note of what
women buy and wear, so it's really not surprising the most popular pant shape
for fall is the look everyone is wearing now -- tight. If it's not tight, it's
likely to be skinny or at least tapered, to keep that slim look.;    The
classic trousers are the alternative, with pleats at the waistline, which is
much kinder to less than perfectly exercised bodies and a bit more acceptable
in a business or luncheon setting.;    Walking shorts, once confined to spring
and summer wardrobes, are included in many fall designer collections. They are
best when slightly full and worn with matching hosiery, making them look as
much like short skirts as pants.;    Tight shorts, resembling hot pants of the
early '70s, are extremely unflattering. Not only do they look dated, but
they're somewhat bulky in contrast to leggings or stretch pants.;    The
single news-maker in pants is Louis Dell'Ollio's innovative pant boots and
pant heels -- all-in-one shoes and pants in sexy, stretch velvet for the Anne
Klein label. If you're wondering about the price tag, how to clean them or how
the company is going to come up with the right shoe size and pants length for
every woman, this look isn't for you. But if you've got the money -- and
although the Anne Klein people say they haven't finalized a price yet, you
know it's going to be high -- it's a fun piece of '90s fashion.; SKIRTS; THE
LONG AND SHORT OF IT;    NINE out of 10 fashion designers will pontificate
that skirt lengths are a non-issue, a matter of personal choice, a subject not
worthy of discussion.;    Yet, nine out of 10 women (and 10 out of 10 men)
will ask about hems first when discussing a new fashion season. Women consider
it a quick barometer and men have more prurient reasons.;    So although there
are both short and long for fall, the short, above-the-knee skirt continues to
dominate. You'll find it slim and straight -- as it has been for the past
couple of years -- but for added variety there are pleated skirts, creating a
flippy look; gored, reminiscent of skating skirts; or circle cut and full.;   
Aside from good-looking legs, what you'll need to make short skirts work is
the right hosiery. For day, dark, color-coordinated tights create a tall look.
For evening, you can experiment with sheer hosiery, but remember that
same-color-as-the-skirt rule if you want to look right.;    At the other end
of the leg -- near the ankle, to be specific -- are a few longer skirts. The
very best are from Ralph Lauren and Christian Francis Roth. Lauren's are long,
skinny mid-calf skirts that have only two darts at the top in front, no
waistband, and a high, center slit in back. Roth's are simple circle skirts
that skim the ankle. Both prove longer lengths can be just as flattering as
short, or more so.;    The indecisive will be cheered by the asymmetrical
hemlines that dip and soar -- sometimes short in front and long in back or
sometimes simply a zig-zag around the knees.; PATTERNS &amp; COLOR; TARTANS AND
BEYOND;    PLAID. Get used to it, because it's everywhere from skirts and
pants and dresses to coats and evening gowns. While a touch of tartan is
attractive, there is so much out there for fall that you need to be careful of
over-dosing.;    While plaids and checks dominate, they aren't the only
patterns. Stripes are popular and there's a smattering of florals, especially
roses. Used minimally, but likely to catch on, are American Indian motifs and
traditional quilt patterns.;    However, if it isn't some sort of plaid
pattern, chances are it's a solid, eye-catching color. Lipstick reds, vibrant
blues and turquoises, apple to lime greens, purples, bright oranges and pinks
all add up to making this one of the brightest fall fashion seasons ever.;   
The traditional autumnal hues of browns and subdued greens and oranges are
around, but they don't compete well against the brighter tones.;    As for
that old favorite -- black is back. Despite proclamations of its demise a year
ago, designers are using it once again, often in conjunction with white. Navy,
which was substituted for black last year, is holding on.; CATSUITS; RETURN OF
THE CATWOMAN;    THE basis for many fall looks is a one-piece, long-sleeved
bodysuit that often is called a catsuit or unitard.;    For the exhibitionist,
it's something you could wear unembellished and re-cycle at Halloween.
However, most women will find it more comfortable to use this piece as the
first layer -- adding a tunic, an oversize slouchy sweater, a short wrap skirt
or combinations of these.;    A problem with the sleek catsuit is the bother
of having to almost totally undress when nature calls. Ah, but there's a
simple solution: Pair a turtleneck with tight stretch pants in the same color.
The look is the same, particularly if you're planning to layer additional tops
and bottoms.;    Whether you go for the all-in-one garment or simply the look,
the key is a turtleneck or a hooded top. Don't leave home without it.; TOPS &amp;
SWEATERS; SEEN ON THE STREET;    DESIGNERS often cite "the street" as a source
of inspiration.;    It's obvious "the street" is the inspiration for the fall
crop of tops and sweaters. Except for bright, bold colors and some interesting
knits, everything is similar to the multitude of big-tops-over-leggings seen
on almost every street in the country.;    It's comfortable and can be very
chic, so why not jump on the bandwagon?;    Look for oversize tunics that can
be layered over tights and turtlenecks, or catsuits.;    Look for oversize,
mohair sweaters to snuggle in or let slouch around the shoulder.;    Look no
further.; DRESSES; Dress success;    DESIGNERS have been paying more attention
to dresses as more and more women are choosing them as an alternate to the
business suit. All this attention is paying off in some new as well as some
familiar looks.;    Consider:;    (box) Simple shifts, chemises, tunics and
T-shirt styles that fall straight and skim the body without clinging.;   
(box) Trapeze and A-line shapes that flare out.;    (box) Audrey Hepburn
"Breakfast at Tiffany's" styles that curve in at the waist and then bell out.;
   (box) Fit and flare -- think of a dress that fits through the bodice and
flares out above or at the waist. It's not as roomy as a trapeze or as slim as
a shift.;    (box) Belts that add waist or hip interest.;    (box) Two-piece
looks created by contrasting tops and bottoms.;    Silhouettes aside, dresses
are embellished with appliques, unusual jewelry-like buttons or zippers.
Prints are minimal, except for plaids, with solid colors a clear favorite.;
SUITS; HIP APPEAL;    THE key suit formula for fall is a simple one -- long
over short.;    Long, hip-length jackets over short skirts is the dominant and
fresh look. Ideally, the jacket is double-breasted and plaid and the skirt is
pleated and plaid and peeking out only a few inches. Of course, variations
work as well -- it doesn't have to be double-breasted or plaid. That
combination is just the most popular.;    For women who dislike long jackets,
there are a few short, fitted, waist-length ones -- again, paired with short
skirts that are straight, pleated or gored. And there are some modified peplum
jackets that fit through the waist and flare slightly a few inches below.;   
As with dresses, trim is a key element separating '91 suits from previous
years. Look for zippers, bold buttons, pocket flaps and combinations of them
all.; JACKETS &amp; COATS; THEY'RE THE TOPS;    THE double-breasted jacket is
making almost as big a splash in women's clothing as it is in men's.;    On
the long side -- at least to the hip or lower -- it's straight or slightly
fitted. For the woman who believes in updating her wardrobe each year with the
right jacket, this year it is definitely double-breasted.;    Like skirt hems,
if the jacket isn't long, it's short. Sometimes it's that traditional
quasi-military look named after former president and general Dwight
Eisenhower. Other times it's leather with a definite biker bent and lots of
zipper details.;    In coats, the pea coat is the cover-up of choice. Look for
it in traditional navy with navy buttons; traditional navy with bright red
buttons; or untraditional bright colors such as yellow.;    Trench coats also
are a favorite, but nothing so boring as the standard foreign correspondent
Burberry look. Think short -- in metallic silver or gold finishes.;    You
won't see much fur this fall -- at least any that is recognizable and likely
to incite obnoxious comments. Rather, it is disguised in bright colors or
hidden as a luxurious liner. In its place are leathers and suede which are
soft, supple and sexy.; ACCESSORIES; DASH AND DAZZLE;    ACCESSORIES are those
final little touches that may look like afterthoughts but in reality are key
pieces in any given fashion season. A particular shoe or earring indelibly
marks an outfit as belonging to a certain season.;    Perhaps even more
important in these times of economic concern is the fact that a single
accessory can update an existing wardrobe. You probably already own a black
turtleneck pullover, but do you have a watch cap?;    Here's some key
accessories to watch for:;    (box) Boots. They're back in a major way. Short,
ankle-length boots. Mid-calf riding boots. To-the-knee suede boots.
Over-the-knee suede boots. Sure, there are flats and high heels in the shoe
world for fall, but boots are the news.;    (box) Watch caps. Hats are not
something most women feel comfortable with, but the sporty watch caps that
Bill Blass used as a key accessory -- both for day and, with the addition of a
rhinestone pin, for evening -- are a candidate for catching on. They'd be nice
on cool, windy days and have a jaunty air.;    (box) Rapper, homeboy looks.
Rap may not be totally mainstream, but its accouterments are going that way.
Think large, gaudy pendants hanging from chains. Think of flashy "rap
knuckles" -- rhinestone-encrusted rings that fit over two or three fingers.;  
 (box) Minimalist jewelry. Calvin Klein used only earrings to accessorize his
fall line. Eleanor P. Brenner used no jewelry at all. One way to go is with
simple, statement-making earrings, preferably with architectural shapes.;   
(box) Maximum jewelry. If the thought of not piling it on is making you sad,
then cite Carolyne Roehm as your inspiration and pile on the fabulous faux
looks of Kenneth Jay Lane and other costume jewelry creators. Diamond-looking
rhinestones are the favored evening stone. Or go for the clearly fun, clearly
plastic pieces. Or, if you can afford it, go for the Robert Lee Morris belts,
necklaces and wonderful "Phantom of the Opera" cuff bracelets that Donna Karan
accessorizes her fall line with.;    (box) Hair. There seems to be two
extremes for fall, at least among the models showing off the clothes in New
York. There's the full, long, past the shoulder, ringlets-and-curls look, as
worn by Claudia Schiffer and her clones. There's the short, slicked down look
worn by Linda Evangelista and others. And then there's the look Bob Mackie
likes -- short, black bobbed wigs.; HEAVENS TO BETSEY; JOHNSON SHOW IS
FASHIONABLE, FUN AND SWEETLY FUNKY -- AND VERY TONGUE-IN-CHIC; New York;    IN
A former Gothic church-turned-disco, Betsey Johnson did what she does best --
the '60s.;    Johnson's credentials are impeccable. A major fashion force in
that decade of bell bottoms, crushed velvet minis and platform shoes, she
continues to evolve and experiment.;    Unfortunately, the wearability factor
of Johnson's designs is totally lost in her fashion presentations. They are
meant to be get-down, good-time events and no one has more fun than Johnson
herself.;    In her recent show, Johnson wore a black crushed velvet,
long-sleeved top, voluminous net petticoats and a dog collar around her neck
(complete with attached red leash). The models came out in black bras,
panties, garter belts and hosiery and changed from one outfit to the next
onstage, never taking the pink foam or beer can rollers out of their hair. The
music was rock, reggae and rap.;    Johnson's descriptions of the outfits are
entertaining, if not enlightening.;    For example, a pink, crocheted dress
is, according to Johnson's program notes, "peep-holes and powder pink
hand-knit mohair Angel-Mini for Lulubelle.";    Never mind. The show is better
than most Broadway productions and when the clothes are in the stores this
fall we can all see exactly what Johnson has wrought.  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  Stories by Mary Gottschalk, Mercury News Style Writer  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910421  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  April  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  1L  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  PHOTO  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,755  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday April 21, 1991
00112089,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
