ID: 118	RANK: 91	SCORE: 7.028624
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870901-0132 </DOCNO>
<HL> Male Executives Also Suffer
For Their Sartorial Mistakes
---
By Kathleen A. Hughes</HL>
<DD> 09/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Men are rarely accused of looking too masculine at work, partly because in the male-dominated business world it's almost impossible to look too masculine. 

   But the safe haven of a suit doesn't prevent men from making sartorial gaffes, and such transgressions are often noted by employers or potential employers with consequences as serious as those for women. 

   Most of the executives interviewed claim they don't pay much attention to how expensive a suit looks or whether it conforms to the latest fashion, unless it's extremely outdated. 
But they say they do frequently take note of ill-fitting suits, unironed shirts, ties that are too short and tacky tie clips, as well as socks and shoes that don't convey a professional image. 

   "The biggest mistake is not fitting in or wearing something that says 'blue collar,'" says John T. Molloy, the author of the "Dress for Success" books. 
"Those who know the rules will look disparagingly at someone who doesn't follow them." 

   Consider the hapless applicant for a $150,000-a-year position as a vice president and general manager of a large Midwestern company. 
Gary Silverman, a regional managing director of Korn/Ferry International, an executive-recruiting firm, had sent the candidate over for an interview with the company's top brass. 

   "The client mentioned the fellow had taken off his suit jacket and had on a short-sleeve shirt with a pocket protector," Mr. Silverman recalls. 
"He said (the applicant) just wouldn't fit in when standing up in front of the directors and making a presentation." 

   However, donning a classic conservative suit isn't always a guarantee of safety, as the rules vary with different industries. 
"In the entertainment industry, if you wear a pin-stripe suit they may be suspicious of you," says David Handelman, senior vice president and general counsel of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. 

   There are geographical differences as well. 
Mr. Silverman says that when he interviews in Arkansas or Georgia he isn't surprised to find male job applicants wearing lime-green or powder-blue polyester suits, patent-leather shoes and white belts. 
"I presume that's acceptable there," he says. 
"But clearly in the Midwest, the East or the West it isn't acceptable." 

   Whatever their color, ill-fitting clothes are an obvious drawback, particularly when the fit is way off. 
Phillip Humphries, the employment manager at Chevron Corp. in San Francisco, recalls one overweight applicant on a college campus who showed up wearing a light-colored suit that was "probably four sizes too small." 

   "Everything bulged," says Mr. Humphries. 
"The buttons were almost popping off, and the suit looked like it was held together with steel bands." 
The man wasn't hired for an engineering position despite a "fairly good" academic record, he notes, adding that the suit wasn't the only reason the candidate was turned down. 
"He was lacking in self-confidence," Mr. Humphries explains, "and he had some nervous mannerisms." 

   Looking too fashionable can also be a problem. 
"The men who run America run it blue, gray and dull," says Mr. Molloy. 
"If you try to spruce up the look, you're in trouble." 

   One of the most serious offenses seems to be unprofessional footwear. 
Among the items likely to raise eyebrows are socks that are white, beige, brightly colored or large-patterned, as well as sloppy shoes, saddle shoes and lounge slippers. 

   Martha Heiberg, director of personnel at Ticor Title Insurance Co. in Los Angeles, says one man applying for a job made the mistake of wearing suede slip-on shoes. 
"The two people who talked to him said, 'I couldn't hire him because he was wearing bedroom slippers,'" she says. 
"They liked him otherwise." 

   He isn't the only one to suffer for the wrong footwear at Ticor. 
Noreen Brown, the company's employment manager, says last year a young man applied unsuccessfully for a position as a methods analyst. 
He came to the interview wearing a sport coat, pants and maroon argyle socks. 

   "He was fine," Ms. Brown explains. 
"It was the manager that didn't like his socks. 
The manager thought the guy was weird because of his socks." 

   Socks have also been an issue at Price Waterhouse in Los Angeles. 
"I've seen beige socks and been repulsed by them," says Merle Hopkins, an area director of recruitment and continuing education for the accounting firm. 
The wrong attire, he notes, "commands attention and therefore distracts from what may be a very important discussion." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
