ID: 118	RANK: 98	SCORE: 6.924243
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870901-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> Businesswomen's Broader Latitude
In Dress Codes Goes Just So Far
---
By Kathleen A. Hughes
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Clothes never shut up." 

   --from "Femininity" by Susan Brownmiller 

   A decade ago, "The Woman's Dress for Success Book" propelled female executives into somber suits and blouses with big floppy bows at the neck. 
Then, a few years ago, a barrage of media stories reported that women had achieved enough success to look more feminine. 
It was fine to loosen up and wear dresses. 

   Now the miniskirt is back. 
The August issue of Vanity Fair magazine features a story entitled "Smart Women Wear Short Skirts," complete with a picture of Gloria Steinem, the editor of Ms. magazine and a renowned feminist, in one. 
The article, like others elsewhere, proclaims that "power women are hitching their hemlines inches above the knee." 

   Maybe so. 
But interviews with dozens of executives, both male and female, found that most would be shocked to see miniskirts on female executives. 
Indeed, the consensus seems to be that, despite the relaxation of dress codes, it still isn't acceptable to look too feminine -- or too sexy or too cute -- in corporate America. 

   Those interviewed say most female executives dress in a professional manner. 
But they can also recall vividly at least one inappropriate outfit that influenced their judgment of a woman's capability. 

   "Looking extremely feminine gives the message that you need to be taken care of," says Brenda York, president of the Academy of Fashion and Image Consultants in McLean, Va. 
"It says you aren't as serious as someone who would refrain from dressing like that." 

   Consider Joe O. Swain, vice president of auditing at Rainier Bancorp. in Seattle. 
Mr. Swain says he recently stopped by the office of a female manager at the company and found her wearing a dress with a "really bright blue background with really large flowers with pink petals and bright yellow in the center." 
The low-cut dress had short sleeves, he adds, and when the woman moved her arms "you could see the underarm." 

   The dress bothered him. 
"I thought, Well that's a very loud and inappropriate dress," he says. 
"I began to question her competence." 

   Not surprisingly, the issue strikes some feminists as absurd. 
"It's a big waste of time to stand in front of your closet and worry about whether someone will think badly of you because of a lacy collar," says Letty Cottin Pogrebin, a founding editor of Ms. "It's a terrible duality. 
It has nothing to do with our performance." 

   Still, in actual practice the results of such readings can be dire. 
John T. Molloy, who wrote a "Dress for Success" book for men as well as the one for women, says that as part of a study he asked the managers of about 10,000 female office workers to describe the women's style of dress. 
Then he tracked the women's career progress over three years. 

   He found that the female executives whose attire was described as "extremely feminine" were typically paid less and promoted less frequently. 
The highest-paid women, on the other hand, were those whose dress was described as professional, dull, conservative, non-sexy or non-frilly. 
Women whose clothes were termed conservative or traditional were twice as likely to receive promotions as those whose dress was labeled frilly or frivolous, or occasionally frilly or occasionally sexy. 

   "If you wear very fluffy or sexy clothing or a miniskirt," Mr. Molloy asserts, "you are cutting short not only your skirt but your career." 

   Men also pay for sartorial mistakes. 
Though the uniform nature of men's suits provides fewer opportunities for dramatic gaffes, and men rarely have to worry about sexist responses, they are often judged harshly for looking too sloppy, too casual, too quirky or too flashy. 
As with women, such infractions lead some executives to question their judgment and business acumen. 

   While the executives interviewed agree that it's certainly possible to look both feminine and professional, just what it means to look "too feminine" is open to debate. 
When the executives were asked to cite specific outfits they find inappropriate, their opinions varied by industry. 
But both men and women mentioned outfits that were too flowery, too tight, too short, too low-cut, too "cutesy" or too loud. 
They also complained about spike heels, hats, and excessive makeup and jewelry. 

   Dress consultants and some female executives provide a more detailed list of sartorial offenses in the office, including sleeveless dresses, scoop backs, colored stockings and, in such industries as investment banking, pastel or pink outfits. 

   "Pink and pastel shades give off messages of being very fragile and very feminine," says Ms. York, the dress consultant. 
"Those colors don't have the power that neutral colors have, such as black, navy or gray." 

   Ms. York points out, however, that flowery dresses may be suitable in "public relations, advertising and fashion fields." 
She says that "if flowery (materials) are in vogue, it's expected" that female executives in those industries will wear them. 

   The executives queried agree that the biggest clothing mistakes seem to show up on job applicants and other visitors from outside an office. 
A female candidate for a job involving labor negotiation at a large Los Angeles savings-and-loan association arrived in a blue and pink flowery dress with "little flouncy sleeves" and a "little lace collar" says Patricia Benninger, a vice president of human resources there. 

   The dress "turned off all the credibility she could have built up during the interview," says Ms. Benninger. 
"My feelings were, She doesn't know the job." 
The outfit, she adds, said that the woman was "someone who could be easily persuaded," and that "this person couldn't stand up to toughness." 

   Some executives conclude that if a woman wears an inappropriate outfit to a job interview she probably doesn't understand the realities of the business world -- and thus isn't a suitable candidate. 
Carl J. Sette, vice president and resident manager at E.F. Hutton &amp; Co. in Stockton, Calif., says that a woman applying for an account-executive position showed up in a low-cut blue and white paisley dress that also featured a slit in the skirt. 

   Mr. Sette, who had talked to the woman on the phone, determined she was well qualified and formed a good impression, turned her down after meeting with her. 
"It bothers me when people try to advertise (physical) assets," says Mr. Sette. 
"Instead of looking at an equal professional, you start questioning." 

   Most of the executives surveyed say they haven't seen many miniskirts on female executives yet, and those who have seem to be concentrated in the entertainment industry. 
Richard Leary, vice president of advertising and publicity at Taft Entertainment Co. in Los Angeles, says he has seen a few in the company's legal-affairs and music divisions. 
"My honest feeling is that it's a little distracting," he says, adding, "In some cases, it's as inappropriate as a man wearing shorts." 

   Sexual signals aren't the only ones miniskirts may give off. 
"A short skirt casts you in the role of the little girl, and we don't take little girls seriously in the workplace," says Virginia O'Leary, a visiting scholar at Radcliffe College and the author of a recent study of female bosses. 

   If looking too feminine or sexy isn't likely to advance one's career, neither is looking too cute. 
And it's usually the youngest members of an office who unwittingly fall into a cuteness trap, executives say. 

   Nan Tepper, the director of personnel at CBS Inc. in Los Angeles, recalls a young female researcher who sometimes wore socks with polka dots, longish shorts and cotton shirts with a bow tie. 
The woman had complained to her that she wasn't being promoted. 
"It hasn't dawned on some younger women that to be taken seriously as a professional you have to present the image," says Ms. Tepper. 

   While most female executives say they rule out wearing "cute" outfits to work, some confess to slipping occasionally. 
Terry L. Flett, a Los Angeles lawyer, says she recently wore a blue sweater with a white lace collar and a green tartan skirt to her office. 
Two of the firm's partners and several secretaries, she says, told her she looked cute. 
She never wore the outfit to work again. 
"Cute seems to be the opposite of serious," she says. 

   Such experiences don't mean a dark suit is the only safe bet. 
When asked to describe professional dress for women, most executives also mention tailored dresses and skirts worn with a jacket. 
Moreover, the frequency of suit wearing seems to be down. 
In a study of some 1,300 women in corporate sales positions, Mr. Molloy, the author, found that about 50% of those studied wear suits two or three days a week now, compared with 70% five years ago. 

   In fact, many executives say that the classic man-tailored suit now looks dated on women. 
Some even find it comical. 

   Lawrence W. Farmer, an executive vice president at Weyerhaeuser Mortgage Co. in Woodland Hills, Calif., hired an executive recruiter after talking to her on the phone. 
She arrived at work wearing a very conservative heavy blue suit, practical shoes and a little bow tie made from a blue, green and black plaid material. 
She was carrying a brand-new briefcase. 

   "She looked like she was going right through the manual of how you do this," says Mr. Farmer. 
"I thought she looked a little funny. 
She looked uncomfortable." 

   ---

                       Dress and Success
   Women in sales positions whose attire is described as
conservative by their managers outperform their colleagues. A
breakdown:
                                   DRESS
                --------------------------------------- -----
                VERY PROFES-            SEXY,
 JOB            IONAL AND VERY  APPRO-  FRILLY OR    POORLY
 PERFORMANCE    CONSERVATIVE    PRIATE  FASHIONABLE  DRESSED
 Top Performers      12.5%       12.6%     11.5%        1.9%
 Consistently
   above average     60.9        41.1      31.0        30.8
 Average or
   below              4.7         2.1       3.4        17.3
    Source: Survey by John T. Molloy fo 298 women in
corporate sales positions

</TEXT>
</DOC>
