ID: 250	RANK: 32	SCORE: 9.786239
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870424-0118 </DOCNO>
<HL> Medicine &amp; Health (A Special Report): Taking Charge
---
...But Some Firms Try to Help
---
By Laurie Hays</HL>
<DD> 04/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR </IN>
<TEXT>
   STRESSED-OUT employees can be bad for business. 
They're grouchy. 
They get sick a lot. 
They procrastinate and miss deadlines. 
Often they lack creativity. 

   When tension mounts at Doug Greene's magazine-publishing company in New Hope, Pa., he and his co-workers start juggling. 
Any three objects will do -- oranges, staplers, erasers. 
"To juggle and finally get that third ball going, you have got to relax," he says. 

   Like Mr. Greene, more managers now figure they can improve the bottom line by helping workers get rid of stress. 
The Association for Fitness in Business estimates that 12,000 companies offer programs ranging from counseling services, lunchtime stress-management seminars and "wellness" publications to elaborate company-run fitness centers where employees can sweat out the tension. 
Stress-management consultants are proliferating, and many companies hire them to teach coping skills like meditation, deep-breathing exercises or yoga. 
Massage therapists make the rounds at a few headquarters, giving at-the-desk relief to tense, aching necks, shoulders and backs. 

   "It's amazing the amount of stress some people are under," says John Thompson, Campbell Soup Co.'s manager of corporate health and fitness. 
"They might build up so much stress from a morning meeting they'll be useless in the afternoon unless they can release that." 

   Campbell's sleek new fitness center at headquarters in Camden, N.J., is a beehive at lunchtime. 
Walkers do laps on a track. 
Top executives and plant workers alike thump treadmills and whir stationary bicycles. 
An aerobics class claps to theme music from "Fame." 

   Joe Scott, a 59-year-old engineer at Campbell's electrical power plant, says he used to drink a case of beer a day. 
"I felt like if I didn't drink, I would end up in the nuthouse," he says. 
Now, instead of frequenting the taproom, he goes to the fitness center to pedal a stationary bike and lift weights. 
He is 85 pounds lighter and says the tension is gone. 
"Exercise has taken the place of drinking," he says. 

   Campbell employees who work out together often develop a camaraderie that reduces tension back in the office. 
"We have a common bond," says William A. Schmidt, vice president of engineering. 

   But not everyone takes stress seriously. 
In fact, Campbell says only 25%, or about 877, workers from its Camden offices and plant use its fitness center, despite its convenience and low cost of only $50 a year. 
And some companies are skeptical of whether such fitness and stress programs are worth the expense and effort. 
To be effective, the company culture has to be supportive. 

   In some cases, if managers have been "mean to employees and thrust a health program on them, nobody signs up or pays any attention," says Alexander Leaf, chairman of the department of preventive medicine at Harvard Medical School. 

   Seven years ago, Johnson &amp; Johnson set out to create a program that would work. 
Called Live for Life, the program is credited with reducing health costs and absenteeism. 
Now officials are trying to market the plan to other companies. 
For roughly $150 a year for each employee, Johnson &amp; Johnson offers periodic checks on blood pressure, weight, cholesterol levels and other health barometers, as well as an exercise regimen and eight health seminars. 
One is devoted specifically to managing stress. 

   "The evidence is clear that it works," asserts Frank H. Barker, president of Johnson &amp; Johnson's Health Management Inc. unit, which sells Live for Life. 

   He says the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School studied 2,000 employees over five years and found that absenteeism dropped to four days a year from five among employees taking part in the fitness and health program, while it rose slightly during the same period for people who didn't use the techniques. 
In addition, researchers found, job satisfaction and company loyalty rose while health costs dropped significantly. 

   Some dispute the Wharton study, citing the high number of variables that determine healthiness and attitudes. 
Regina E. Herzlinger, a professor at Harvard Business School, says that nonetheless, the "assumption" that such programs work is a pretty safe bet. 

   It didn't take a Wharton study to convince Bea Firgau that she needed help managing her stress. 
Between shopping, cooking and keeping house for her family and working as a secretary to three Johnson &amp; Johnson managers, stress took over her life. 

   After taking Live for Life's stress-management seminar, she started to walk 15 minutes to work every morning instead of driving and to use deep-breathing exercises when she feels tense. 
When she goes home at night, she lies on her bed and listens to a tape that instructs her to tense and relax her muscles. 
"Gradually, your body feels very soothed," she says. 

   Sally Fitzhugh, 33, balances her job mothering a six-month-old and a four-year-old with her job as a marketing staff manager for Southwestern Bell Corp. in St. Louis. 
Her company's course taught her to take her children's spilled oatmeal in stride and not to give up when management turns down a project idea. 

   Control Data Corp.'s course, "How to Relax," includes assertiveness training in how to get along with other workers, another common source of tension. 
Rather than taking offensive behavior from another employee personally, for instance, the course instructs employees to understand that the colleague might be unhappy or insecure. 

   At the very least, workers are encouraged to personalize their offices and surround themselves with relaxing images. 
Paul Terry, a stress consultant, keeps a picture of his favorite fishing spot on his office wall. 
"It's inherently relaxing," he says. 

   But as a rule, little is done to address a chief source of tension: the boss. 
Says T George Harris, editor-in-chief of American Health magazine: "Bosses are the people giving the ulcers." 

   ---
   Ms. Hays is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Philadelphia bureau. 

   (See related story: "Pressure, Pressure Everywhere..." -- WSJ April 24, 1987) 

   ---

                  Health Care: What Employers Do
   A government survey found that nearly two-thirds of U.S.
work sites with 50 or more employees had at least one
health-promotion activity. The most popular:
                                        Percentage
    Activity                            of Work Sites
    Smoking control                          36%
    Health risk assessment                   30
    Back care                                29
    Stress management                        27
    Exercise and fitness                     22
    Off-the-job accident prevention          20
    Nutrition education                      17
    High blood pressure control              17
    Weight control                           15
   Source: Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1985

</TEXT>
</DOC>
