ID: 250	RANK: 33	SCORE: 9.680013
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880407-0130 </DOCNO>
<HL> Far-Out Guru Behind U.S. Best-Seller Arouses Fear and Violence in Calcutta </HL>
<AUTHOR> Anthony Spaeth (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> FREST </CO>
<DATELINE> CALCUTTA, India  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In his best-seller, "The Great Depression of 1990," Ravi Batra acknowledges his intellectual debt to the guru who inspires him -- P.R. Sarkar, a 67-year-old, bespectacled former railway cashier who began a yoga cult in 1955. 

   Mr. Batra, an economics professor at Southern Methodist University in the U.S., cites Mr. Sarkar 34 times in the book, which has made its author an overnight millionaire. 
He describes the guru only sketchily as a "leading scholar from India who has profoundly enriched the literature of many disciplines." 

   Mr. Batra doesn't mention the swami's teaching that the key to life is a form of yoga that uncoils the sexual energy trapped at the base of your spine. 
Nor the teaching that sex should be indulged in no more than four times a month. 
Nor the guru's statement that plants are people, too. 

   In Calcutta, Mr. Sarkar's cult is feared and despised. 
In 1982, 16 of its members were burned alive by angry Calcutta mobs. 
Mr. Sarkar served six years in prison for conspiring to kill six of his acolytes (the conviction was reversed on appeal). 

   Today, Mr. Sarkar claims 4,500 full-time acolytes. 
Mr. Batra has been a follower of Mr. Sarkar since 1964 and says it was his perusal of one of Mr. Sarkar's books that convinced him history moves in cycles. 
Much of "The Great Depression of 1990" is a statistical argument that a cataclysmic downturn in the world's economic cycle is due in 1990. 

   The guru's organization operates in 182 countries. 
He mostly runs preschool centers, where tykes are taught to sit crosslegged on the floor, squeeze their eyes shut and access the sexual energy at the base of their tiny spines. 

   The Calcutta police say Mr. Sarkar's other main subsidiary is a terrorist nationalist group called Amra Bengali that plants time bombs in government offices. (Mr. 
Sarkar refused a request for an interview; followers say he rarely entertains unenlightened non-meditators.) 

   To the devoted, Mr. Sarkar is a font of knowledge in many disciplines -- botany, linguistics, history, philosophy and pyschology included -- and a bundle of superhuman energy. 
He talks and sings 20 hours a day. 
Every week he writes one book; every day he composes several songs. (More precisely, his followers do the actual bookwriting and the transposing of the songs. 
Mr. Sarkar just talks and sings as he walks in his six botanical gardens, his zoos and his two houses, trailed by aides with notebooks and tape recorders.) 

   "Every word is a pearl," says Sister Susan, a blue-eyed American acolyte who refuses to be identified fully in fear of deportation. 
"When you transcribe his words, they're like poems." 

   Epic poems, Susan means. 
The cult's bookshop is stacked to the ceiling with Mr. Sarkar's pearls. 
The "nutshell" version of his economic theories runs 12 volumes. 

   Currently being transcribed: the tail-end of Mr. Sarkar's three-year discourse on philology, his exhaustive theories on agriculture and a series of children's stories. 
In perennial demand: his own molecular theory, which provokes hilariously confused discussions among the faithful, and an eye-opening dictionary full of novel etymologies. (The word "God," Mr. Sarkar instructs, is an acronymn for the words generator, operator and destructor. 
The litchi fruit was named for a Chinese horticulturist named Lee Chi.) 

   Mr. Sarkar's cult, called Ananda Marg, or "Path of Joy," may have its silly side. 
But it is taken very seriously here in Calcutta. 
It has 1,500 monks and nuns -- celibate vegetarians who wear orange robes -- and 3,000 married acolytes. 
Five hundred of the monks and nuns come from the West, bringing much of the cult's financial resources, police say. 
The cult's "world headquarters" is surrounded by high walls and barbed wire -- a symbol of the cult's relations with its neighbors. 

   The "margis," as they are known, bring homeless children to orphanages that are, in fact, training camps for the cult. 
The group says its methods are legal, but its neighbors are doubtful and accuse the clan of child-stealing. 

   Public anger reached its zenith April 30, 1982, when angry mobs stopped three taxis bearing margis, dragged them from their cars, bludgeoned and poured acid on them and finally burned them to death. 
The cult claims the incident was planned and carried out by the left-wing local government. 
The group's official literature claims the government, and behind it the Soviet Union, is alarmed at the cult's success. 

   Incidents involving the group have become so commonplace in Calcutta that a news story headlined "95 Ananda Margis Arrested" merited only two paragraphs in the local papers. 

   The cult denies that it operates the local terrorist group, although it admits the group has taken intellectual succor from Mr. Sarkar. 
"And no one blames the pope for an Irish terrorist," Sister Susan says. 

   Sister Susan shakes her head sadly when the awkward issue of the swami's wife, Uma Sarkar, rears its ugly head. 
Corrupted by an evil acolyte, Sister Susan says. 
Power crazy. 
There's no truth, Susan says, to the murder charges made against the swami in 1971 by Mrs. Sarkar, who is now separated from her husband. 

   Mr. Batra, the author, admits in an interview in New Delhi that he is now the most famous margi in the world and perhaps the richest. 
But he emphasizes that he doesn't work full-time as an acolyte. 
He says he doesn't contribute any of his book's proceeds to the group, and the margis' sour reaction to the topic suggests he's telling the truth. 

   But Mr. Batra's devotion to Mr. Sarkar remains strong. 
The author reads the swami's works "constantly" and meditates using his method. 
He recently made a pilgrimage to see Mr. Sarkar, "to see if I was interpreting his ideas correctly." 

   But even if he wanted to be a full-time margi, he probably couldn't squeeze it into his hectic book-promotion schedule. 
Since "The Great Depression of 1990" was published in June, Mr. Batra has given at least 500 interviews and 75 lectures. 
On a recent trip to Australia, he gave 19 interviews in one day. 
During one five-day stay in Japan, he appeared on 40 television shows. 
In the middle of one lecture in Japan, an earthquake occurred. 

   "They all shouted, 'It's an earthquake!'" says Mr. Batra. 
"I said, 'No, it's a depression!'" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
