ID: 250	RANK: 35	SCORE: 9.497937
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880902-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> Pampered Pooches Can Lap Up the Life Of Luxury in Japan --- Bikinis, Yogurt and Spas Fill Dog Days of Summer; Kitty's $6,000 Necklace </HL>
<AUTHOR> Yumiko Ono (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> JAPAN </CO>
<DATELINE> KINUGAWA, Japan  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   After traveling 400 miles from Tokyo to one of Japan's most popular hot spa resorts, Mary decides she doesn't like bathing outdoors, especially with male company. 
She takes one dip in the steaming water, then springs up, clutching the edge of the tub. 
She glances indignantly at Harry, who sits relaxed, head back in the water, eyes closed. 

   Mary, an eight-month-old miniature spaniel, and Harry, a two-year-old Chihuahua, are spending a relaxing weekend at the Kinugawa Kokusai Hotel's "pets-only, mixed-bathing" outdoor spa. 
After the bath, they will get a thorough blow-dry, and then chow down a low-fat dinner of boiled chicken and milk, at the same table as their owners. 

   Such are the lengths that Japanese pet lovers go to to pamper their pooches. 
Californians may have their dog cemeteries and cat psychics, but in the last few years, Japanese pet freaks have become every bit as eccentric, creating a $2 billion-a-year industry. 
Goods and services now available to Japan's 12 million dogs and cats include diapers, bikinis, dating services, weddings, yoga and funerals. 

   "This pet boom is absurd," says Katsumi Hoshino, a lecturer on changing social trends at the University of Tsukuba. 
"There are more businesses for pets than for people." 

   The cause of all this is simple: Some Japanese have more money than they know what to do with. 
Few can afford to buy housing in Japan's overheated real-estate market, so some spend the surplus yen on canned oxygen (used by sports buffs and others) and electric nail shavers. 
Others, particularly middle-aged women, buy $1,900 Maltese dogs or $3,800 Scottish Fold cats, give them American names, which they think are cute, and then shower the little darlings with luxuries. 

   "Whenever I see cute pet clothes, I keep wanting to buy them," says Kinue Gunji, a housewife living in the south of Tokyo. 
"Sure they cost money. 
But I love my dog more than my child." 
Mrs. Gunji is staying at the spa with her daughter, her husband, and her Pomeranian, Shelley, who gets a monthly medical check-up, and was recently treated to a new set of rain boots. 

   Hotel owner Keiko Akutsu began offering pet lodging and meals last year, after she took a trip to Europe and was impressed by the welcome many hotels there extended to animals. 
Expanding on the European concept, Mrs. Akutsu charges people $110 a night to stay at her hotel, and allows their pets to stay with them for an extra $4. 
Her hotel's revenues have nearly doubled. 

   "The owners are so pleased when we treat the pets like people," says the 55-year-old Mrs. Akutsu, who even has little futon mattresses for the pets. 
Animal guests, who tend to arrive wearing hats and dresses, are referred to as "little boys" and "little girls." 
Owners are discreetly handed a plastic pick-up bag and a packet of tissues before they go for a walk. 

   These boys and girls are free to socialize in the lounge beside the pet souvenir shop, while their owners chat. 
Squeezed into a tight denim jumpsuit, Chuji, a chubby male Pomeranian, bounces off the table, flapping the red ribbons tied around his ears. 
Two of his buttons have burst. 
"We have a jumpsuit just like that one," says Mrs. Gunji, the devoted owner of Shelley. 
"But ours has a little pocket to put tissues in." 

   Chuji and Mary rub noses, and their owners coo in delight. 
Shingo, a two-pound Chihuahua wrapped in a red kilted vest, is jealous. 
Seeking attention, he strolls over to the bar and urinates on the carpet, making Mrs. Akutsu rush over with a can of deodorant spray. 
His owner, a middle-aged woman in pink pajamas, gives him a little slap, then cuddles him tightly. 

   Those looking for more things to put on the dog, will enjoy the Osaka pet fair this month. 
Along with pet clothes, wigs and good luck charms, there will be $380,000 cats prancing around wearing $6,000 necklaces. 
Then, there will be the wedding. 
Two Shetland sheepdogs, one dressed in a tuxedo and the other in a wedding dress, will exchange collars in front of a human "priest," as bow-tied St. Bernards and Pomeranians watch and wag. 

   Actually, the groom is lucky to have found a bride. 
In Japan, where many pet owners live in apartments, most male house pets can't sneak out at night, and thus have no chance to meet girls. 
They end their lives single and sad, says Isoroku Kimura, a Tokyo pet-shop owner. 
He felt so sorry for them that last year, he set up a pet dating service. 
Twenty dogs, each of whose owners has dished out snap shots, resumes and $75 for each date, have high hopes for the coming mating season this fall. 

   Even pets' everyday food and clothing are becoming more upscale. 
At Adachiya, a pet fashion boutique in Tokyo's Asakusa district, a baseball uniform, with cap and socks, hangs next to a raincoat and a dress with huge sunflower patterns. (Sunflowers are also the fashion for human girls in Japan this summer.) 

   "We sometimes wonder if these things are really necessary," confesses Yoshio Iida, an Adachiya executive. 
But the tiny store sold 170 pet garments one cold winter day. 
The clothes, priced $30 and up, are made in all sizes, to fit anything from Chihuahuas to Great Danes. 
A simpler T-shirt, jumpsuit, or cotton kimono is recommended for sharp-nailed cats. 
There are also a red bikini for the beach, a knapsack for the mountains, a $300 kimono and a $7,600 white mink coat for special photo-taking occasions. 

   Sogo department store in Yokohama prepares elaborate take-out meals for pets. 
The most popular, says a store official, is the $75 pet steak dinner of premium rare beef, unsalted ham, sausages and cheese, and white chocolate for dessert. 
Yasuaki Ohmori, a Tokyo high-school teacher, confesses to having stolen a bite of his dachshund's meal, a meat dish in a special sauce. 
"It was quite tasty," he says in embarrassment. 

   When too much rich food starts showing as flab, Fido can turn to jogging machines and yogurt, made especially for dogs. 
At Japan Trimming School, pets can take a 45-minute private yoga lesson for $35: An instructor personally stretches them into 15 poses, intended to improve blood circulation and relax muscles. (Concentration is said to be essential, so distracting observers aren't allowed.) 
Although most students are canines, someone once brought a rabbit for a stretch. 

   After the prized pet eventually passes away, a funeral service will cremate the pet right outside the owner's door. 
Jippo Corp., a truck company, sends a young woman ceremony director in the "Pet Angel Service" truck. 
Clad in a pink jumpsuit to give the event a rosier image, she instructs tearful owners to place flowers on the pink altar, next to the truck's incinerator. 
"Thank you for taking care of me up till now," says a recorded woman's voice. 
The ashes are placed in a candy jar. 

   A more symbolic ritual proceeds in a planetarium-like dome in the basement of a western Tokyo pet shop. 
Mourners gaze upward at a $520,000 computer-generated image of a galaxy, while music blares. 
A pulsing blob of light in a clear pyramid, meant to represent the pet's soul, shoots a spark of light into a star. 

   "There," says the funeral director. 
"The pet has gone back to the land of stars." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
