ID: 250	RANK: 38	SCORE: 9.145552
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880329-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Mom's Troubles at an Ashram </HL>
<AUTHOR> Raymond Sokolov </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   What does this woman want? 
She's left her doctor-husband and her big suburban house near Boston and her daughter, and betaken herself to Ashram Arhat in Arizona. 
It all seems to be a classic midlife crisis, part self-assertion, part self-denial. 
Perhaps Sarah Worth's flight into the arms of meditational communalism in the Southwestern desert is merely an extension of her earlier life, a postgraduate fellowship that builds on yoga classes she used to take at home. 

   Sarah is the "S." of John Updike's latest novel (Knopf, 279 pages, $17.95), and he leaves no doubt where he is coming from (as one of the Arhat subgurus might have put it). 
Sarah's initial is an update on the "A" that Hester Prynne wore for adultery in "The Scarlet Letter." 
Nathaniel Hawthorne is not, however, Mr. Updike's only inspiration. 
Much more central to his enterprise was the journalism done by Frances Fitzgerald and others about a real-life ashram based on sex and cash and fascism in Oregon called Rajneeshpuram. 
That blighted utopia has since vanished in a haze of criminality and Rolls-Royce exhaust. 
Mr. Updike's version of it, seen through the eyes of a WASP mom, will probably not endure much longer than Rajneeshpuram did, but its author deserves only mild condemnation. 
There are no jail sentences for pretension or for creating inconsistent characters. 

   The pretentious part of "S." is its flaunting of unassimilated lingo from the world of yoga and allied fields. 
Mr. Updike is frank to tell us that he has crammed Eastern religion from various standard sources. 
He quotes, with attribution, from "The Dhammapada," and he provides the puzzled reader with a glossary of technical terms ("bhaga: womb; vagina; good fortune, happiness, excellence"). 
Admittedly, some of the entries have a certain lightheaded poetry to them, as does some of the rest of the book. 
But "S." is no place to learn about Buddhism. 
Mr. Updike is no guru, nor does he really intend to be. 
And yet he spends so much of his time blathering in tantric terminology that the ironic or humorous potential of it as yogobabble or yogibberish gets lost. 

   The book falls between, as it were, the linga and yoni of satire and true belief, mocking and yet not mocking. 
And Sarah Worth herself fails to straddle the gap, but it's not for want of trying. 

   You have to admire Sarah. 
She really gives it a go out there, without losing much dignity. 
Oh, she does suffer a bit of what the defendant in the "Preppy Murder" of Jennifer Levin termed "rough sex." 
And she has to endure some obscene name calling. 
But after a little initial discomfort, Sarah rises to the top of the heap at Arhat, finding multiorgasmic satori with the guru of gurus and bilking the place out of a good hunk of its capital. 

   This all develops in the time-honored manner of the epistolary novel. 
In other words, we know only what Sarah writes home to friends or records on cassette. 

   The trouble is that Sarah's too big and too sensible a character for the nonsense world she has inexplicably run off to. 
She is no Alice blundering into a new-age Wonderland, but a shrewd, manipulative and completely unscrupulous adult, hiding behind a deceptively genteel facade. 
First, she bilks her husband, then the Arhat. 
And no regrets. 
Here is a woman who makes Ivan Boesky look like a sanctimonious loser. 
Except that you have to ask yourself how the same person could have been so misguided as to have married her husband or to have thought that Ashram Arhat was the place to go after shedding him. 

   This is how Sarah sounds, explaining in a letter to her daughter, Pearl, that the spots on the stationery are tear stains: "I'm wearing the silk sari, in case the Master comes in. 
Water is bad for silk and saltwater must be worse. 
But it felt good to cry. 
The Master has given me so much of his own peace I'd almost forgotten how to manage a good old Occidental convulsion -- a "Schmerzfest," a purgative "deluge des larmes chaudes." 
So, then, to continue." 

   The best we can say about that kind of stuff is that it's what comes out when a writer of great glibness lets himself go. 
Perhaps Sarah should be taken as an Updikean Miss Marple, a preposterous but lovable woman who only seems to be a ditz. 
But even if you are willing to read this book as an E.F. Benson comedy with saguaros and sagebrush in the background instead of perennial borders and copper beeches, Sarah will stop you. 

   Sarah is simply too many people all at once, too many voices. 
Writing to her exhusband, she says: "Don't you see, dear muddlehead, we were a "wave,"a certain momentary density within the maya-veil of karma -- events that produced Pearl, but now she is moving on and we must too. 
Let go of her and me." 
But in the next sentence, she changes from airhead to hardhead: "You have the houses and the New Hampshire land and all the silver that didn't come from either the Prices or the Peabodys -- the Worth stuff is clunky but sterling and you could sell it on consignment through Shreve's if you're feeling so desperately poor." 

   Sarah could have been salvaged with some tinkering, her disparities knitted smoothly together. 
She requires dvandvanabhighata, the "cessation of trouble from pairs of opposites." 
But for that kind of rewriting, a man has to achieve ekagrata, "the state of concentration whereby the "yogi" eliminates distractions and gains control over his restless consciousness." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
