ID: 250	RANK: 43	SCORE: 8.682323
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871021-0034 </DOCNO>
<HL> Try a Brain Tuneup
To Keep Your Mind
Off the Stock Market
---
Inner Peace Costs a Mere $10
And 45 Minutes at the Spa;
Is There Anything to It?
---
By Carrie Dolan
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> CORTE MADERA, Calif.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Nearly every day, Carol Cramer comes to the Paradise Shopping Center to buy her piece of nirvana. 

   "I was looking into Transcendental Meditation, but it takes so long" to learn the techniques, says Mrs. Cramer, a Sausalito homemaker. 
"I like something fast and easy. 
This takes no effort." 

   Universe of You, a new Marin County salon, offers help for high-strung people too busy to meditate. 
Now they can try to zap stress by hooking themselves up to a device called a Synchro-Energizer, which is supposed to "tune up" the wavelengths of the brain. 

   The machine costs about $50,000 and can accommodate up to 32 serenity seekers at a time. 
It uses electronic sound impulses and flashing light -- to balance, so the pitch goes, the left and right hemispheres of the brain. 
For $10 a pop, Marinites in goggles can enhance their creativity, increase their learning ability and find inner peace in about 45 minutes. 

   "Yogis are out, gurus are out. 
No one wants dogma anymore," says Randy Adamadama, a former night watchman at a science museum who now runs the brain-tuning salon. 
"This can get a person to a level of meditation in 15 minutes that would take a yoga instructor 10 years." 
Says a Synchro-Energizer salesman: "We're selling Buddha in a can." 

   Is there really anything to this stuff? 
"If flashing lights and goggles help you relax, that's good," says Stephen Peroutka, an assistant professor in Stanford University's neurology department. 
"Relaxation is always good for the body." 
He adds, however, that "there's no scientific evidence that any mechanical device can enhance learning or creativity. . . . 
There's no magic way to do it." 

   But Dr. Peroutka isn't surprised that people would use such devices. 
"This is the same country that bought pet rocks," he says. 
He suggests that memorizing multiplication tables or other types of studying would do more to "exercise" the brain. 

   Nevertheless, a growing but still tiny number of retail outlets are offering brain-enhancing sessions. 
Michael Hutchison, the author of "Megabrain," a book about brain machines, predicts that such brain spas "will be the Jack LaLannes of the future." 

   Mr. Hutchison, a poet and novelist, has been conducting Megabrain workshops around the country. 
He says that more than 1,000 people have paid about $100 to spend the day trying a dozen different brain machines. 
The interest, he says, reflects "people's tremendous desire for self-improvement, especially in their mental state." 

   Altered States, based in West Hollywood, Calif., has for several years been operating flotation tanks, where customers meditate in warm water. 
Recently, the center added a small, two-station Synchro-Energizer; a Mind Mirror, which monitors brain waves; and a Graham Potentializer, a table that rotates counterclockwise while generating an electromagnetic current. 
Altered States now offers $300 "Mind Gym" memberships, allowing patrons to use the assorted devices for 20 sessions. 
Says attendant Bart Miali: "It's really like using Nautilus equipment, only on the mind." 

   The Institute for DeHypnotherapy, in Soquel, Calif., offers "Sacred Journey Home" weekends for $150. 
They include sessions on its 32-station Synchro-Energizer and a Mind Mirror, as well as instruction in power breathing and other meditation techniques. 
"A whole lot more people are interested in higher consciousness, especially since the Harmonic Convergence," says C.C. Chaitanya of the institute's marketing department. 

   At Tranquility Center, a New York salon using the small Synchro-Energizer, operator Christine Zerrer says, "I've meditated 15 years and the experience is similar. 
In fact, I've hooked Zen monks up to it, and they even noticed some increased awareness. 
There's always room for improvement." 

   Each brain-machine entrepreneur has his own style. 
The big appeal of Universe of You is low price. 
"We're like the K mart of consciousness-raising," says Mr. Adamadama. 

   To understand the goals and people at Universe of You requires an open mind. 
"If you've never done anything like this before, you might just think of it as another Marin mind trip," concedes Mrs. Cramer, who once attended a Shirley MacLaine mind-expanding seminar and who last spring, she says, walked across seven feet of burning coals. 
She hopes the brain-tuner will help her have more lucid dreams, improve her memory and "make it easier to get into the vacation mode" for a coming trip to Hawaii. 

   Arthur Knadler, a Sausalito investor, calls himself a skeptic. 
"I don't embrace that mysticism stuff," he confides. 
Still, he gets Synchro-Energized a couple of times a week and finds it better than lying in flotation tanks, which he tried before. 
The Synchro-Energizer, he says, "gives you a general sense of well-being, and you don't have to get all wet." 

   Patrons enter a lavender lobby, decorated with symbols of yin and yang and pictures of a wizard and a waterfall. 
In a dimly lit room with mirrored walls and reclining padded chairs, the machine's operator invites customers to remove their shoes and loosen their clothing. 

   The customers put on headphones and goggles with four lights around each eye. 
Lights begin to flash at different speeds and intensities. 
Through the headphones comes the sound of a heartbeat, then assorted clicks, then a sound like a lawn sprinkler. 
Later there is synthesized music accompanied by the sound of the pounding surf. 

   An operator sitting at a console twists knobs that control intensity and pitch. 
"I use a very gentle, comfortable pitch to get them inside their niche with the machine," she says. 
"Toward the end, I get them alert and focused, so they can go back to work or drive their car without hitting a tree." 

   Afterward, patrons are invited into an adjoining room where an orange statue of Buddha, wearing Walkman headphones, sits between a pair of ferns. 
There they can sit in bamboo chairs, help themselves to herbal tea -- choice of carob or licorice flavor -- and share their experiences. 

   Bob Zatko, a hot-tub and sauna salesman from Oakland, says his first session provided "an alternative reality to normal reality." 
He found the experience "very relaxing; in fact, I fell asleep." 
One man marvels that "it sounded like you were right there at the ocean." 
The ocean, in reality, is a little bit down the road. 

   The operators at Universe of You make no medical claims, though patrons contend the machine has done everything from growing hair on bald spots and improving hearing to unleashing more-ethereal experiences. 
Stephen Landess, a maker of massage machines, says he wasn't prepared for an out-of-body experience that happened during one of his sessions. 
"I wasn't planning on going anywhere," he says. 
"My light body walked right out the door and went to the gas station." 

   The Synchro-Energizer is the brainchild of Denis Gorges, a Cleveland psychiatrist. 
He invented the machine, and his company, Synchro-Tech Inc., sells it. 
Dr. Gorges says he spent about 30 years developing it. 
"I walked around in a jogging suit hooked up with electrodes for two years," he says, "experimenting on myself with different stimuli." 
He says the machine's signals are "all brain-friendly." 

   Mr. Adamadama wants to franchise brain-tuning centers. 
To maintain quality control, he says, he would have to be sure franchisees are knowledgeable about holistic medicine, astrology and New Age music. 
"The California market is a natural," he says. 
"This kind of thing isn't new or alien to them." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
