ID: 250	RANK: 58	SCORE: 7.756899
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870901-0130 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Japanese Artists Struck With Low
Prestige -- and the Taxman
---
By Carol Lutfy</HL>
<DD> 09/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Young Japanese artists don't make it much bigger than Kenjiro Okazaki. 
At 31, he is represented by Tokyo's powerful Nantenshi Gallery. 
His works grace the corridors of four museums across the country. 
But with earnings from his art averaging only $420 a month, the cost of success may be too steep to afford. 
"I have half the standard of living of the average Japanese," says the sculptor, who supplements his income by illustrating comic books. 

   Japanese collectors turn a cold shoulder toward their own modern artists. 
Instead, they continue to show a keen interest in impressionism and 20th-century Western art. 
Last spring, Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Insurance Co. set a record with its $40 million purchase of Van Gogh's "Sunflowers." 

   At home, however, the volume of the art market for the entire nation, $2 billion, is roughly one-tenth the size of the New York art market. 

   Japanese corporations, particularly newspaper companies, customarily supplement museum budgets, but little money trickles down to living artists. 
While some public funds are reserved for an elite group of traditional Japanese-style (nhonga) painters, public grants are otherwise unavailable. 
In fact, the Asian Cultural Council, an American institution supported locally by a few corporations, is the only private foundation benefiting artists in the country. 

   Of the approximately 30,000 painters and sculptors in Japan, fewer than 300 are able to support themselves with their work. 
Among those success stories, fewer than 30 work in a contemporary style. 

   Part of the problem may be the Japanese tax system. 
Contributions to science and industry are tax deductible, but donations to the arts are not. (Exceptions are made for contributions to nationally funded institutions.) 

   Art sales are almost always concealed in order to avoid heavy tax penalties. 
So critical is the secrecy that in some cases even the buyer can't see a work before it is purchased. 
Auctions are closed to everyone but the roughly 500 members of the Art Dealers' Association. 
Collectors and dealers recognize that this kind of environment does not stimulate a healthy art trade. 
And there's been talk of establishing a public auction house to liven up the market. 
But without also creating an incentive for collectors its prospects are said to be slim. 
"The taxman is the art collector's friend overseas. 
He should be here, too," wrote Mitsukuni Yoshida, professor emeritus of cultural history at Kyoto University, in a recent Japan Times editorial. 

   But steeped in a long tradition of formality and hierarchy, the art world remains rigid and resistant to change. 
Japan's art market can be broken down into three categories: nihonga, yoga (European-style painting based on impressionism, which was introduced in Japan around the turn of the century), and contemporary art. 
Nihonga and yoga make up 90% of its activity, even though they possess dubious value as so-called fine art, according to critics. 
"From a historical point of view, traditional Japanese and European-style painting are no longer significant," says Shigeo Chiba, curator at the Museum of Modern Art in Tokyo. 

   For artists who remain in Japan, however, art is an expensive undertaking. 
As collectors of contemporary art are limited to a handful of individuals and institutions, most galleries can't afford to show current work. 
So, realizing that it might be their only shot at getting discovered, artists foot the bill themselves, by renting out space in one of Tokyo's 400 or so "cash galleries." 
Space at Muramatsu, one of the oldest galleries and coincidently where Mr. Okazaki got his start, rents for about $3,500 a week. 

   But in addition to burning holes in a lot of pockets, working as an artist in Japan seems to eat away at egos as well. 
Especially for a male, the stigma is still strong; artists are perceived as goof-offs, explains Mr. Okazaki, who says he was an embarrassment to his family for years. 

   Many believe that the central obstacle to the growth of the arts here is Japanese society itself. 
Committed to the nation's economic prosperity, the Japanese have willingly forgone personal interests, some say. 
At first, the theory goes, there was no time for leisure activities, now there is no desire. 
"We are economic animals," says Mr. Chiba, "and animals don't need cultural and artistic things." 

   Others take it a step further by questioning the Japanese capacity to respond to serious art. 
"In Japan we live in a capsule: a clean, white, sanitary capsule. 
It's safe and it's pure, but it keeps out anything that's different," says Yoshiaki Tono, an art critic and professor at Tama Art University. 
"Now artists here are trying to open our eyes to what the world is and should be. 
But it might be that we have already abandoned our imaginations." 

   No wonder that insecurity is the main mood of the local art world. 
The Japanese still look up to Western artists, trust the Western aesthetic, and to a certain extent insist that the Western product is superior. 
"When an artist is already established in New York, we see it as a sort of guarantee of quality," says Haruo Aoki, owner of the Nantenshi Gallery. 

   Then, too, the West is proven ground for contemporary art. 
And the Japanese, who, as one critic put it, tend to buy "not the work of art, but the name of the artist," are naturally drawn to the big-label brands. 
To the Japanese, buying art "is the same as buying a New York skyscraper or valuable stock," says Toshio Hara, owner of the Hara Museum. 
"When art is expensive, the Japanese automatically think it's good," says Mr. Tono. 
"So when they hear the prices of Japanese contemporary artists, they assume they're not worth looking at." 

   Given this reasoning, it's possible that the appearance of a Japanese international art superstar -- on the order of fashion designer Issey Miyake -- could legitimize the Japanese art world in Japanese eyes. 

   "Once the trend begins, it won't end," says Mr. Hara. 
"That's the Japanese character." 

   ---
   Ms. Lutfy is a free-lance journalist living in Tokyo. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
