ID: 250	RANK: 79	SCORE: 6.717049
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880310-0083 </DOCNO>
<HL> As New Age Books Prosper, Publishers Squeeze All They Can Into the Category </HL>
<AUTHOR> Kathleen A. Hughes (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PUB RET </IN>
<TEXT>
   Looking for a book on extraterrestrials? 
Horoscopes? 
Don't bother heading for the astrology or occult sections of local bookstores, because those categories are being supplanted by a new one: "New Age." 

   It won't be hard to find. 
In many stores the New Age section is getting bigger by the day and has been moved closer to the front of the shop. 
And publishers have jumped on the bandwagon by re-marketing older tomes on far-out subjects. 

   Nobody seems to know exactly what New Age means, but one thing is certain: New Age sells. 
So among treatises on such core New Age topics as reincarnation and the power of crystals, booksellers are wedging titles like "Bee Pollen and Your Health" and even a new version of a '60s feminist classic, "Our Bodies, Ourselves." 

   "The New Age has come to cover such a broad range of attitudes and beliefs, there is no way to get a handle on it anymore," says Jeremy P. Tarcher, the owner of a small Los Angeles publishing house. 
"Publishers are labeling as New Age books that are simply old nonsense." 
He says his company's books include some that he categorizes, with increasing reluctance, as New Age. 

   Many publishers peg the surge of interest in New Age books to "Out on a Limb," last year's television miniseries based on a book by Shirley MacLaine. 
The series detailed the actress's growing faith in reincarnation and the supernatural, and it caused a run on the occult sections of major bookstores. 
B. Dalton Bookseller, a nationwide chain owned by BDB Inc., says sales in its occult and astrology sections jumped 90% in the week after the miniseries. 

   The "Out on a Limb" series didn't mention New Age per se, and publishers are hard-pressed to define the term. 
Jonathan Adolph, a senior editor at New Age Journal, defines the term vaguely as "a group of emerging values" that represent "a reaction to industrialized, mechanized thinking." 
New Age thought is sometimes defined as a mix of Eastern philosophies, positive thinking and the human-potential movement from the '60s. 

   The vagueness has created a marketing opportunity for bookstores. 
Dalton trashed its astrology signs in favor of New Age signs last summer. 
But it also raided other categories, including nutrition and biography, to bolster the new section. 
Dalton's New Age category now includes 1,500 titles. 
Crown Books Corp., a large discount chain, began adding New Age sections to its stores six months ago; it says sales of those books in that category have since surged. 

   Publishers are rushing out new books on popular New Age topics such as channeling -- a term for spirit mediumship -- and the purported power of crystals to boost energy and deliver love and happiness. 
Some are even packaging books on crystals with actual crystals. 
But more often, publishers are simply slapping New Age labels on old books. 

   Simon &amp; Schuster Inc., a unit of Gulf &amp; Western Inc., introduced a New Age list 18 months ago. 
It now includes "The Art of Sensual Massage" and "Our Bodies, Ourselves," both first published in 1972, and "American Yoga Association's Beginners Manual," first out in 1974. 
In fact, 75% of the books now on the list were already in print when Simon &amp; Schuster created the category; sales of titles on the list rose 20% last year from 1986. 

   "New Age is a world view that has grown out of philosophies from the '60s," says Sol Skolnick, vice president and publisher of trade paperbacks for Simon &amp; Schuster. 
Although "The Art of Sensual Massage" originally was a counterculture hippie book, it belongs on the new New Age list because "it's a humanistic approach, and there's an openness on the part of the authors," Mr. Skolnick adds. 

   Distributors also are getting into the act. 
Ingram Book Co., one of the nation's largest book distributors, added a New Age catalog about six months ago with about 2,000 titles, and sales of the books are climbing 20% a year. 
Ingram's New Age catalog includes everything from "Love Is Letting Go of Fear" to "Freedom From Back Pain." 

   Veterans of New Age publishing scoff at the ever-widening definition of the category. 
Bantam Books Inc., a unit of Bertelsmann AG of West Germany, started its Bantam New Age Books line eight years ago. 
Toni Burbank, executive editor for the imprint, says Bantam has exercised some restraint in adding to the list, partly out of deference to existing authors. 
"Some of them don't necessarily want to be right next to a tarot-card book," she says. 

   Authors don't always know their books are being marketed as New Age books, and some who do are apprehensive. 
"There's a selling-of-snake-oil aspect to the whole New Age thing," says David Peat, a physicist and the author of "Science, Order and Creativity," a book about theories on the universe that is on Bantam's New Age list. 
But he adds, "If being on the New Age list means more people will read it, and it's in a good position in the bookstore, then fine." 

   Some authors have refused to have their books marketed in the New Age category. 
James Gleick, author of "Chaos: Making a New Science," a best seller about new theories in physics, rejected a request from his editor at Viking to include the book on the company's New Age list. 
"It's sad to see publishers jumping on this cultish, anti-intellectual bandwagon," Mr. Gleick says. 
He calls the New Age category "a hodgepodge of trendy ideas." 

   Last May, the New Age Publishing and Retailing Alliance was formed in Seattle, and it now comprises 140 small publishers, distributors and retailers. 
Marilyn McGuire, executive director, concedes that she doesn't care for the term New Age because "it has a lack of credibility." 
But with an eye on the bottom line, she advises publishers to include books on "self-improvement and making the world a better place" on New Age lists. 

   And what is Ms. McGuire's idea of a true New Age book? 
It's "The Little Engine That Could," the children's classic about a locomotive that remains optimistic as it struggles to climb a steep hill. 
"It's about being positive and about not being afraid," she says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
