ID: 250	RANK: 91	SCORE: 6.338514
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870910-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> MARKETING:
Photographer Focuses on Stars
In New American Express Ads
---
By Ronald Alsop
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AXP
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   AS THE SUN sets on a nearly deserted beach in Connecticut, photographer Annie Leibovitz crouches in the dirt snapping pictures of retired baseball star Tom Seaver. 
Striving to create just the right image of sportsman and family man, she has been photographing him all day long -- chopping wood, romping with his black Labrador retriever and now pitching baseballs. 

   But she still isn't satisfied. 
The lanky, blonde photographer ambles over to Mr. Seaver and demonstrates how to hurl a fast ball and do a graceful follow-through. 
"I feel like I'm telling Fred Astaire how to dance," she jokes, as a tired but patient Mr. Seaver obediently mimics her pitching moves. 
By the time the shoot ends, she has gone through 40 rolls of film, and the sunlight has turned to starlight. 

   A demanding perfectionist, Ms. Leibovitz doesn't quit until she gets what she wants -- and hopefully what American Express Co. wants. 
Mr. Seaver is the latest of about a dozen celebrities she has photographed for the company's new "Portraits" credit-card ad campaign. 
It's no easy feat to stand out among the plethora of celebrity ads these days, but the Portrait ads are attracting praise for their artistry and originality. 

   TO MAKE A SPLASH, American Express decided to seek personalities who rarely if ever do endorsements: novelist Elmore Leonard, football coach Joe Paterno, actors Candice Bergen and Tom Selleck, musician Quincy Jones, playwright Beth Henley and architect I.M. Pei. 
Only a few of the company's choices, notably Tip O'Neill and yachtsman Dennis Conner, are busy plugging beer and other products. (American Express won't disclose their pay, but sources say the celebrities get $20,000 to $50,000.) 

   Even more important than the celebrities themselves is the way they're depicted in the ads. 
On the advice of ad agency Ogilvy &amp; Mather, American Express hired Ms. Leibovitz, who is best known for her provocative photos of rock singers and movie stars in Rolling Stone magazine. 
But she took the assignment only after striking an unusual deal: Not one American Express executive is present when she is shooting; only Parry Merkley, an Ogilvy &amp; Mather art director, is allowed to attend. 
"This is as close as I've ever come to re-creating my editorial work in ads," she says. 
"I hate having a committee telling the celebrity how to act and me how to shoot." 

   MS. LEIBOVITZ insists on so much personal control because of her sour experiences with other advertisers. 
For instance, she says, she was told to do celebrity portraits for ads promoting U.S. News &amp; World Report, but before long, "the main issue became where to place a copy of the magazine in the picture." 
And she says she had to battle to keep her name off some ads she created for Rose's Lime Juice. 
"My first love is editorial, and that's the only place I allow my name to appear," she explains. 
"I have this constant struggle over what I do for myself and for money." 
She won't reveal what American Express pays but says it's far more than she earns for editorial work. 

   In the American Express card ads, Ms. Leibovitz tries to portray the celebrities in ways the public has never seen them before. 
Thus there's gospel singer Amy Grant seemingly walking on water (she's really perched on a clear plastic box); Beth Henley leaning against the ivy-coated fence of an old Southern mansion (Ms. Leibovitz drove 450 miles on the back roads of Mississippi to find the right setting), and an unshaven Quincy Jones lounging in shorts and sweatshirt after his yoga exercises (he also posed wearing a tuxedo and sitting at a piano in the desert, but it looked contrived). 

   ABOVE ALL, Ms. Leibovitz wants the ads to reflect an intimate side of these famous figures. 
But it's often a struggle to persuade them just to be themselves. 
She had hoped to show Tip O'Neill puffing on a cigar at the beach, but he refused because his wife hates his smoking. 
Eventually, they compromised, and a cigar butt was stuck in the sand by his chair. 

   Most of the subjects want to rush out and get a haircut and snazzy new clothes. 
Instead, Ms. Leibovitz drops by their homes the day before the shoot and rummages through their closets -- sometimes even their dirty laundry -- to pick out a suitable outfit. 
"Beth Henley had a closet full of wonderful 1940s thrift-shop dresses," Mr. Merkley of Ogilvy says. 
"It was hard to decide what to pick." 

   On the Tom Seaver shoot, creating a natural look required some artificial assistance. 
A stylist frequently mussed up his hair and squirted water on him to simulate sweat. 
There also was an electric fan to give him a wind-blown look, and his white sweat pants were soaked in tea and rubbed in mud to make them scruffier. 

   But those technical adjustments are minor compared with some of the challenges with which Ms. Leibovitz has had to contend. 
She was all set to photograph crime novelist Elmore Leonard in the seedy alleys of Detroit when an unexpected March snowfall forced them to fly to Miami Beach. 
Blind singer Ray Charles was uncomfortable having his picture taken, so she had to rush through the session while other people cracked jokes to try to help him relax. 
And with Luciano Pavarotti, it was like pulling teeth. 

   After traveling to Milan, Italy, where he was singing in an opera, Ms. Leibovitz was first told she could shoot him only from the neck up. 
After she talked Mr. Pavarotti out of that, he balked at her plan to photograph him with a horse. 
Then the pair battled over the length of the shoot: They were working outdoors and he was concerned the chill might hurt his voice. 
"The expensive trip doesn't seem worth it now," Ms. Leibovitz says. 
"We ended up with a shot of him in front of a red barn door that could be anywhere." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
