ID: 288	RANK: 41	SCORE: 5.277326
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880927-0040 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Olympics: Trish Who? The High Jumper From 'Nowhere' </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   This is the most competitive Olympics ever, so it is easy to be misled about what constitutes an upset on the various fields of play. 
With the level of performance as high as it has been, it's well nigh impossible for the men and women who win medals to come from the "nowhere" of which sports legend-makers are fond. 

   Take, for instance, Duncan Armstrong of Australia, who defeated Matt Biondi of the U.S. and Michael Gross of West Germany in the men's 200-meter freestyle swim. 
His victory was unexpected, to be sure, but "Big Dunc" had been a Commonwealth Games titleholder and several times a national champion in his homeland, which long has been very much in the Olympic swim. 

   Similarly, after El Hadj Dia Ba defeated the great Edwin Moses in the 400-meter hurdles on Sunday, and missed beating the U.S.'s Andre Phillips for a gold medal by a body's width, he was asked by an American reporter to "tell us a few things about yourself," which is a nice way of asking "Who are you?" 

   The tall Senegalese replied politely that he had placed fifth in the event in the 1984 Olympics and the '87 World Championships, and was ranked sixth in the world going into these Games. 
This was a polite way of saying that the people who mattered knew. 

   A quite-different scene took place last July in Indianapolis, at the Track and Field Trials that determined the U.S. team that would compete here. 
On the medals stand for the women's high jump, third-place finisher Coleen Sommer, a veteran campaigner and former U.S. record holder, glanced at one of the women sharing the platform with her, and then glanced again. 

   "She looked at me like she couldn't believe her eyes, and said 'Who are you, anyway?'" recalls Trish King, who had cleared 6-feet, 5-inches to place second behind Louise Ritter and qualify for Seoul. 
"I think she figured she knew everybody who was anybody in the event." 

   As King is quick to point out, though, Sommer couldn't be blamed for her incredulity, because until that day King wasn't much of anybody in track. 
At age 25 (she's 26 now), King had never cleared more than 6-feet-1 1/2 until the week of the Trials, and her trophy cabinet was all but bare after a dozen years of off-and-on participation in the sport. 
She hadn't jumped six feet -- a height that doesn't win some high-school state meets these days -- until 1987, and had attained the 6-1 1/4 Trials qualifying standard just a few months before in a heptathlon contest. 

   "To call me an outsider would have been to put it mildly," says the slim, light-haired King, whose 5-foot-7-inch stature is short for her specialty. 
"A lot of times, I felt funny about getting into meets without a ticket." 

   That King is in the Olympics with track and field's big boys and girls is testimony not only to her stick-to-itiveness, but also to the notion that sport can be enjoyed for its own sake. 
For almost all of the time she competed, beginning in high school at Yorba Linda, Calif., and extending through four years at the University of Oregon, she regarded athletics as just one of several things she was up to. 

   She says she's gotten serious about her jumping of late, but, in fact, she's still a part-timer at it, holding down a 9-to- 5, 6, 7 or 8 job as a vice president at School Properties USA, a company in Redwood City, Calif., that lines up sponsors for high-school athletic programs. 
"The people I work for are nice about my training -- as long as I get the work I'm paid for done first," she notes, smiling. 

   Unlike almost all athletes who attain national prominence in sports-crazy America, King was far from a child prodigy. 
She jumped 5-9 1/4 to place third in the California state meet as a high school junior, but the next year couldn't match that mark and slipped to fourth. 

   At Oregon, which she attended without athletic scholarship, she was on the track team in her freshman and junior years, but not as a sophomore or senior. 
"I liked track, but I also liked racquetball and handball, and just hanging out," she says. 
"That's hardly a champion's attitude." 

   Instead of sliding gracefully into yuppiehood upon graduation, however, King made a fateful turn. 
She took up the heptathlon, which includes the 100-meter hurdles, 200- and 800-meter runs, shot put, javelin throw and long and high jumps. 
"I'm not completely sure why I did it -- probably because I felt my life needed some discipline," she says. 
"I certainly didn't see myself whipping the East Germans at it in Seoul." 

   But stick with it she did, and progress ensued. 
In 1986 she qualified for the heptathlon nationals and placed sixth behind Jackie Joyner-Kersee, who did go on to whip the East Germans at Seoul. 
The effort earned King a spot in her first international competition, a U.S.-Canada meet that same year. 

   And as she was going faster and farther in the multi-event grind, she was going higher in her high-jump specialty. 
She cleared six feet for the first time last year, and 6-1 1/2 during a heptathlon at Long Beach, Calif., last spring, a mark that made her eligible for the jump at the Trials. 

   A funny thing happened driving home from that meet, King avers. 
"I was in my car alone, listening to the radio, when all of a sudden my body got real tingly. 
I thought, 'I can do it! 
I can make the Games in the high jump!' 
It was the first time I'd had an experience like that." 

   At Indianapolis, King leaped from the twilight zone to the medals stand. 
She cleared a personal best of 6-2 3/4 in the heptathlon high jump (she placed eighth overall), and topped that by 2 1/4 inches in the individual event a few days later. 
Her 6-5 leap was the eighth-best ever by an American woman, and would have been good for second in the 1980 Olympics. 

   This is 1988, though, and it's likely to take more than that to place here this week. 
The favorite is Stefka Kostadinova of Bulgaria, who holds the world's record of 6-10 1/4. 
But in her dreams, King sees Kostadinova looking up at her on the medals stand and asking (in Bulgarian, I guess), "Who are you, anyway?" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
