ID: 288	RANK: 42	SCORE: 5.263021
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870310-0012 </DOCNO>
<HL> Platinum, Palladium Mine
Is a First in North America</HL>
<DD> 03/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CHV MAN
MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN>
<DATELINE> TORONTO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   North America's first platinum and palladium mine began production yesterday, about four months ahead of schedule. 

   Joseph Dewey, project director of Montana's Stillwater Mining Co., said Stillwater's mill is scheduled to reach its daily production capacity rate of 500 tons of ore next week. 
Platinum and palladium concentrates from Stillwater will be shipped to Belgium for refining, he said. 
Stillwater is projected to produce about 26,000 ounces of platinum and 78,000 ounces of palladium annually, he said. 

   The mine, about 80 miles southwest of Billings, Mont., is a joint venture of LAC Minerals Ltd., Toronto, and units of Chevron Corp., San Francisco, and of Manville Corp., Denver. 

   Most of the non-communist world's platinum and palladium is currently produced in South Africa, leading to concern about reliability of supply. 
Canada produces some platinum-group metals as a nickel byproduct. 
Platinum and palladium are used in a variety of industrial and defense products. 870310-0011. 
Labor Letter: A Special News Report on People And Their Jobs in Offices, Fields and Factories --- By Selwyn Feinstein 03/10/87 WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) LABOR TAXES FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) 

   TAX-LAW CHANGES reshape how companies pay executives overseas. 

   Most companies make up the difference between the taxes a manager would have owed had he stayed in the U.S. and the usually higher tax bite actually incurred abroad. 
To compute this theoretical U.S. tax, companies had been assuming the executives were entitled to itemized deductions equivalent to 16% to 20% of base pay, says Steven Kates of CPAs Arthur Young. 
But deduction curbs imposed by the new tax law are forcing companies to be less generous. 

   Chevron Corp. has reduced its allowance for expatriate-employee deductions to a range of 13% to 15% from 17%-25%. 
BankAmerica Corp. is cutting its allowance for deductions to 18% from 24%. 
Chase Manhattan Corp. is switching to a calculation based on actual itemized deductions, hypothetical state taxes and 60% of the housing allowance. 
Some other companies, though, says Randy Paschke of CPAs Arthur Andersen, are delaying changes, even though that will mean windfalls for executives overseas. 

   Standing pat with 1986 policies and 1987 tax rates could cost companies $1,000 a head, Mr. Kates figures. 

   CLUB MEMBERSHIPS make good business sense, companies say. 

   Sun Co., hailing club participation as a "sound business practice," pays for all memberships that "enhance the company's business," including luncheon and golf clubs, says Bill Rutherford, a vice president. 
At clubs, says Mark De Michele, president of AZP Group, "you have the opportunity to interface with your major customers." 

   Most corporations view clubs as a perk reserved for the top. 
But Facet Enterprises, taking a broader view, picks up the tab for a secretary in a public-speaking organization and allows her to use company time for chores with a word-processing group. 

   FOOTING THE BILL: Companies ponder how to pre-fund retiree health costs. 

   Raymond Pfeister of CPAs Coopers &amp; Lybrand figures a corporation with 1,000 active workers and 200 retirees will have to pay $10.8 million over the years to continue their health insurance until they die; the cost for the retirees alone can run to $153,000 a year. 
Most companies, he says, have been paying the tab as they go along. 
But, as the cost swells, an increasing number are mulling how to put aside the funds in advance, as they now are doing to finance pensions. 

   Mr. Pfeister suggests life insurance on key employees as one financing route. 
Policy earnings accumulating tax free, supplemented by death benefits, can bring after-tax returns of 20%, he contends. 
And the funds can be tapped relatively cheaply. 
Kenneth Shapiro of consultant Hay/Huggins Co. agrees life insurance should be considered, but he cautions it might be expensive. 

   Insurance offers "a nice tax advantage, but you're buying death coverage you may not need," Mr. Shapiro says. 

   LIKE A FIDDLER on the roof. 
The head of a money-management department handling $1 billion to $5 billion at an investment firm is likely to be paid more than $170,000 a year, double the amount paid a counterpart managing the same amount of money at a bank, Mercer-Meidinger-Hansen says. 
Tradition, the consultant explains. 

   WORK AND COLLEGE can be a troubled mix. 
Economists Ronald Ehrenberg and Daniel Sherman, writing in the Journal of Human Resources, say they can't find any strong evidence that part-time employment hurts student grades. 
But work does reduce the likelihood the students will be back next year or graduate on time. 

   ON-THE-JOB TRAINING: The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is sending its chief financial officer, Barry Weintrob, to work at CBS Inc. for the rest of the year to see how the private sector handles its affairs. 
He'll remain on the Port Authority payroll while at CBS. 

   IT'S A VIDEO AGE. Today's young executives, reared on TV spots and music videos, are "cynical about communications" and "simply don't enjoy reading," contends Bill Morton, whose Jack Morton Productions stages sales and training presentations. 
The only way to train them, he says, is with multimedia displays of sounds and sights. 

   RELAX, STUDENTS. When mergers come, your job offers are usually safe. 

   One law student went through some traumatic moments recently when a partnership that had offered her a job suddenly announced it was being absorbed by a bigger firm. 
She didn't calm down until she ultimately was informed the invitation still held good. 
But such tales usually have happy endings, say placement officials at graduate business and law schools. 

   "The usual practice is to honor commitments," says Barbara McGloin at the University of Chicago business school. 
One Stanford MBA offered a post at an investment bank's venture-capital division, for instance, was told that operation was being phased out. 
Still, he was invited to join the bank's corporate finance division, or take a couple of months pay, which he grabbed. 

   If a company changes, often it is the student who opts out, says Fredric Way of Columbia's business school. 

   THE CHECKOFF: What's another zero to big-money handlers? 
A new monthly called Trillion being planned by the Investment Management Institute will carry a price tag of $25 a copy. . . . 
Tall story: A federal appeals court rules Roadway Express wasn't guilty of sexual discrimination against men when it set a 6-foot-4-inch height limit for drivers and refused to hire a 6-foot-7 white male. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
