ID: 281	RANK: 88	SCORE: 5.559350
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880317-0109 </DOCNO>
<HL> Birth Cycle: For Poor Teen-Agers, Pregnancies Become New Rite of Passage --- How a Clinic at a High School In Los Angeles Attempts To Stem the Rising Tide --- Some Boasting by the Boys </HL>
<AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> PHA </IN>
<DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A tiny, timid 15-year-old girl traipses into the health clinic here at Jordan High School and complains of dizziness. 
The staff soon discovers that she is four months pregnant. 

   A counselor, Hazel Black, makes the difficult phone call to the girl's mother. 
Then, she takes the teen-ager into a private room, closes the door and, in exasperated tones, tells her: "No wonder your mother is hysterical; you've already had one baby for her to raise. 
Now, you're giving her another." 

   Fighting illegitimacy is a major problem in the ghetto. 
Teen-age pregnancy -- once taboo -- has become a rite of passage for many children of the poor. 
"Back in the '60s, babies were mistakes. 
Now, if you haven't had a kid by the age of 18, {they think} there's something wrong with you," says Lannie Foster, a teacher and administrator at Jordan High for 22 years. 

   The issue, although often cast in moral terms, is wider. 
Teen-age motherhood hobbles social and economic advancement for the largely black and Hispanic population of poor neighborhoods. 
Generations of women have lost opportunities for education and work because of their own out-of-wedlock children and then their children's children. 

   Unwed black teen-agers are nearly five times more likely to have a baby than are white teen-agers, despite a slight overall decline in teen-age births recently. 
About 80% of the black children of Watts, the Los Angeles ghetto seared by riots in 1965, are born out of wedlock. 
Many junior-high-school students here have babies. 
And at Jordan High, in the heart of this south-central Los Angeles community, the birthrate is stunning: One-fourth of the school's 1,000 girls have babies each year. 

   The problem of teen-age pregnancy is national, and it is being addressed by organizations ranging from the NAACP to many churches to the White House. 
But it is schools that are on the front lines. 
The Los Angeles school board, searching for solutions, recently opened a free clinic at Jordan High. 
There's little talk of abstinence, although staffers say they favor it, and sex is treated forthrightly. 
The clinic both teaches students who are confused about sexual facts and counsels those who are knowledgeable but don't care. 
A team of counselors, including students acting as "peer" counselors, meets regularly with the most at-risk students to convince them that parenthood doesn't solve problems. 
Sexually experienced teen-agers are urged to use birth control. 

   Educators in many cities are taking this tack. 
There are about 120 such facilities; dozens more are planned. 
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, based in Princeton, N.J., has aided more than 40 clinics, including Jordan High's. 

   The clinics have sparked debate despite growing indications that they work. 
Roman Catholic clergymen object to distribution of birth-control devices and argue that the clinics encourage promiscuity. 
Church-related anti-abortion groups have picketed the facilities, deriding "contraceptives between classes." 
On the Jordan High clinic's opening day last September, several dozen pickets paraded before television cameras in protest. 
Since then, they have been back to pressure the school board to close the facility. 

   Reacting to the emotional debate, the Jordan High clinic offers a variety of services. 
A clinic handbill advertises 11 of them, listing pregnancy tests and contraception ninth, well below things like dental care and treatment of minor diseases. 

   But the school board's priority is to bring down birthrates. 
Just down the hall from the principal's office, the suite of white-walled rooms, with their examining tables and detailed anatomical posters, is close to the clanging of students' lockers and the classrooms. 
Among cabinets of medical paraphernalia, aspirin and unguents, counselors and other health professionals dispense birth-control pills, diaphragms and condoms to children, many of whom aren't old enough to drive. 

   At a big wooden counter in the waiting room, an assistant -- one of almost a dozen staffers -- sets up appointments. 
Students jostle with one another between classes and at lunch time. 
Parental permission is required to use the clinic, although parents rarely object. 

   Clinic staffers decline to disclose statistics, fearing that the numbers will help opponents. 
But after five months, the clinic is believed to be serving more than a third of Jordan's students -- three times the number expected by this time. 

   A 16-year-old dressed in skin-tight jeans slips into the clinic on her first visit. 
Jeffrey Thompson, the physician's assistant, ushers her into an examination room for a physical. 
Shy at first, the girl slowly admits that she plans to sleep with her 23-year-old boyfriend and wants birth-control pills. 
When the physical is over, the girl must sit through a counselor's half-hour explanation of how the body's reproductive system -- and the pill -- works. 
The counselor gives her a month's supply of pills and an appointment for a follow-up visit. 

   Girls using the clinic outnumber boys and more often ask directly for contraception. 
Many boys visit for an athletic physical, not contraception, and, Mr. Thompson says, "I always have to bring it up." 
Few want condoms for birth control; so he urges their use to prevent acquired immune deficiency syndrome and gonorrhea. (No one has tested positive for the AIDS virus yet, but Jordan has one of the highest gonorrhea rates in the city's schools.) 

   The atmosphere here is friendly but direct, as the 15-year-old pregnant with her second baby discovers. 
Mrs. Black, the counselor, begins explaining various birth-control methods with the aid of plastic anatomical models and sample contraceptives. 
By school-district policy, any mention of abortion is taboo. 

   It's too late this time for this student, and Mrs. Black -- suspecting a motive behind the second pregnancy -- adds a stern admonition: "Don't think this boy is going to marry you -- your first baby's father didn't." 
Then she softens it with a folksy recollection of teaching her own son about birth control when he was a teen-ager. 

   The teary-eyed girl says little and stares at the door; outside it, her boyfriend sits in the waiting room. 
In the hallway beyond, the shouts of students changing classes reverberate, reminding Mrs. Black that this soon-to-be mother of two needs an excuse to give her teacher for missing a class. 

   Shortly before the clinic opened, school officials took a survey and found that nearly two-thirds of the students who said they were sexually active had never used birth control. 
One, a 17-year-old with orange hair spiked upward like a crown and heavy eye makeup, contends, "Raising a baby isn't hard; with my baby, I don't need nobody else." 
She and her 16-year-old sister have three babies between them. 

   Bowing to reality, school officials have opened a day-care center to encourage teen-age mothers to stay in school. 
It cares for the babies of 22 students, but Patricia Connor, its 32-year-old manager, worries that it may only perpetuate a life style that she wants to discourage. 
Looking over the toddlers, she says, "Their grandmothers are my age. 
They have five kids, all by different men, and they have no skills." 

   Fighting that cycle, the clinic staff hustles for patients. 
The facility is run by the local Watts Health Foundation, and most of the staff members are from the area and familiar with its problems. 
Director Donzella Lee -- a street-smart Watts native with a master's degree in public health -- mixes with Jordan's students in the halls, in the schoolyard, even at dances. 
"Kids won't come to a place they don't know, and they won't deal with adults they don't trust," she points out. 

   At times, the clinic happens on clients. 
One girl was brought in not long ago after an assistant principal found her scraping her arm with a knife in a fruitless effort to remove a tattoo. 
At the clinic, she said she had been sexually active for two years without birth control and had had one abortion. 
The clinic arranged a pregnancy test and birth-control counseling. 
However, she never showed up. 
Like two sisters before her, she dropped out of school. 

   Despite such failures, school clinics do make a difference. 
A project in St. Paul, Minn., has cut the birthrate at four high schools by two-thirds over a decade. 
More strikingly, a Baltimore clinic focusing on education and counseling changed younger teens' sexual habits and attitudes; a researcher found that participating girls postponed their sexual initiation an average of seven months. 

   But so strongly ingrained is the cycle of "babies having babies" that clinic officials expect to achieve only a 25% drop in pregnancy rates over the next six years. 
Poverty and hopelessness weigh heavily at Jordan, where police patrol the halls and fears of gang warfare are rampant. 

   Although the vast majority of teen pregnancies are unintended, researchers find that the girls most likely to become pregnant are those with few academic aspirations or job skills and little sense that pregnancy would blight their future. 
Some are trying to escape childhoods troubled by missing fathers or drug-addicted mothers. 
And the welfare system makes pregnancy seem almost like a job. 
Jordan has several adolescent welfare mothers, including two 16-year-olds who get a total of $1,040 a month and share their own apartment. 

   Many Jordan girls seem nonchalant about the risk of having sex without contraception. 
Asked whether they know they can easily get birth-control help, a pretty 15-year-old replies, "If I went to the clinic to get the pill, everybody would know I was having sex." 
What about caring for a baby? 
A 17-year-old giggles and shrugs, "My mother would take care of it." 

   Peer pressure, too, is intense. 
"It's a put-down to a girl to say, 'You can't have no baby,'" says Miss Lee, the clinic's director. 
And in the macho folkways of Watts gangs, fathering a child is proof of manhood -- although child support has little cachet. 
Not far down the hall from the clinic, a 17-year-old gang member is bragging that his girlfriend is pregnant. 

   Grinning, he cradles the air with his arms and coos over and over again, "A baby, a baby." 
His 14-year-old girlfriend is in junior high school. 
He himself has no plans for the future. 

   Though the Los Angeles school board is expanding the clinic system to other schools, some leaders of the project are cautious. 
Robert L. Smith, the community health director at the Watts Health Foundation, worries about inflated hopes. 
Two decades ago, he says, "People thought busing was going to solve everything. 
What if people expect too much?" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
