ID: 290	RANK: 53	SCORE: 6.506677
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881116-0132 </DOCNO>
<HL> International: Jamaica's Disastrous Hurricane Gilbert Has Political as Well as Physical Effects </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jose de Cordoba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LATAM </CO>
<DATELINE> KINGSTON, Jamaica  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The telephone caller's anger comes through loud and clear over the static of the radio talk show. 
He wants to know why, in the aftermath of Hurricane Gilbert, the government hasn't provided him with a blanket. 

   "The government doesn't have any blankets," answers Prime Minister Edward Seaga in the slightly testy tones of a schoolteacher addressing a thick student. 
But, says the island's conservative prime minister, the government will soon be providing relief stamps that can be exchanged for food and building materials. 
Griping and dissatisfaction over the pace of reconstruction efforts have dimmed the "Gilbert effect," which after the storm briefly pulled Mr. Seaga within two points of his opponent, Michael Manley, in the polls. 
Immediately after the storm, Jamaicans had judged that Mr. Seaga, with his close ties to the U.S., could get more reconstruction aid. 
But now, Mr. Seaga, who must call an election by April, has fallen behind Mr. Manley, his perennial socialist rival and former prime minister, by a 10 point margin. 
And Carl Stone, Jamaica's leading pollster, says Mr. Manley's People's National Party should increase its lead even further over Mr. Seaga's Jamaica Labor Party as Gilbert-inspired fears subside. 

   Nevertheless, Mr. Seaga insists that Jamaicans have gotten over their long-term love affair with the charismatic Mr. Manley, whose close friendship with Fidel Castro caused confrontation with Washington when Mr. Manley was in power in the 1970s. 
Mr. Seaga sees his chances improving. 
"When you have money, you can afford a lover. 
When you don't have money, you need a father," says Mr. Seaga. 

   Until Gilbert blew in nine weeks ago, Jamaica was enjoying a second year of strong economic recovery. 
But Mr. Seaga, a dour technocrat, hadn't transformed the bright economic picture into political capital. 
Jamaicans complained he had stripped social services and cut education. 

   In Gilbert's wake, Mr. Seaga has attracted an impressive amount of international relief -- as much as $612 million ($125 million from the U.S.), of which $381 million is new money. 
Insurance payments could bring in $800 million. 
Jamaica might even post a net foreign exchange gain on the storm, says Mr. Seaga. 

   The bulk of Mr. Seaga's relief-stamp programs is expected to come on stream this month. 
Most politically savvy Jamaicans feel that Mr. Seaga will call elections for early December, after a rush of rebuilding dollars has been released and before the natural process of dissatisfaction with any relief effort takes hold. 
An early December date would also skirt the winter tourist season, which brings Jamaica a third of its foreign-exchange earnings. 

   But human nature is fickle and the island's reconstruction is a sword that cuts two ways. 
Take Yallahs, a one-horse town banged up by Gilbert. 
It is the site of a pilot program through which the government grants Jamaicans whose houses were damaged up to $360 in stamps that can be exchanged for construction materials. 
One day last week, a crowd of shirtless, barefoot villagers had nothing good to say about the government's relief efforts -- although most had benefited from them. 

   Standing in front of a tent that has been her home since the storm, Jean McDonald is unhappy. 
"It's too small," she complains of the $360 in building stamps she got. 
"It can't make a good start." 

   At Yallahs' hardware store, Michelle Buchanan, the manager, shakes her head and says building stamps have given her "more headaches than men and broken hearts." 
People want cash, not stamps, says Ms. Buchanan. 

   Mr. Manley has been campaigning flat-out, conducting walking tours through poor neighborhoods where the faithful wear T-shirts bearing his photograph. 

   Off the hustings, Mr. Manley says time has made him a mellower and wiser man. 
Slinging a leg over an armchair in his comfortable Kingston house, Mr. Manley says that if he wins, he will again recognize Cuba. 
But this time around, he says, he won't let his friendship with Fidel Castro poison his relations with Washington or raise domestic hackles. 

   In the 1970s, Mr. Manley's socialist policies wrecked Jamaica's economy, but now he says his philosophy has changed. 
"We have largely abandoned the belief that the state has a significant role to play in production," says Mr. Manley. 

   Whether the middle class, overwhelmingly in Mr. Seaga's corner, will believe Mr. Manley, is another story. 
Mark Ricketts, publisher of Jamaica's only financial magazine, says many Jamaicans are parking capital abroad in case the new Manley turns out to be the old Manley. 

   The good news for Jamaicans is that Gilbert was less disastrous than thought. 
At first, Gilbert was portrayed as a mortal blow to the island's economy. 
Mr. Seaga likened the devastation in parts of the island to "Hiroshima." 
Initial reports put the cost of Gilbert's damage at $8 billion, a figure later reduced to $800 million. 

   Although many of the island's farms were flattened, Jamaica's key bauxite and tourist industries escaped relatively unscathed, as did most of its manufacturing base. 
Electricity has been restored to about 85% of the island. 
Most factories are back in operation, says Anthony Barnes, president of the Jamaica Manufacturers Association. 
Carlton Davis, executive director of the Jamaica Bauxite Institute, estimates the country will lose only about $14 million in bauxite and alumina exports, which last year earned Jamaica about $200 million. 

   Tourism, the island's largest foreign exchange earner, could be a tougher sell. 
Most hotels are back in operation, having used the downtime to refurbish. 
But Gilbert caused many cancellations. 
Take the Wyndham Rose Hall Hotel in Montego Bay. 
During the storm, a ham radio operator said it had split open like a banana. 
In fact, the hotel didn't suffer serious damage. 
But the publicity helped slash occupancy 50%, says manager Andrew Helal. 

   Government officials, who before the hurricane were expecting about 1.1 million tourists to spend about $595 million, now estimate 965,000 tourists will come and spending will slip to about $500 million. 

   Jamaica is aggressively wooing travel agents with everything from free trips to $25-per-head discounts for every three-night tourist booking before Jan. 31. 
A $15 million advertising campaign has as its theme: "Gilbert huffed and he puffed, but he couldn't blow us down." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
