ID: 308	RANK: 11	SCORE: 11.974889
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880107-0052 </DOCNO>
<HL> Insurers Threatened by a Nearsighted Debate </HL>
<AUTHOR> Douglas L. Hallett </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> FIN INS </IN>
<G> JUS CNG </G>
<TEXT>
   The Justice Department is now working with Congress on new legislation to strip the insurance industry of its exemption from federal antitrust laws under the McCarran-Ferguson Act. 
This follows attacks on the act from Federal Trade Commission Chairman Daniel Oliver and vitriolic defenses of the status quo from the insurance industry and its regulators. 
Rarely has so much energy been devoted to a debate so irrelevant. 

   McCarran-Ferguson was enacted in 1945 to preserve state control over insurance regulation in response to a Supreme Court decision holding insurance part of interstate commerce and therefore subject to federal action. 
The act declares that "no act of Congress shall be construed to invalidate, impair or supersede any law enacted by any state for the purpose of regulating the business of insurance." 
It goes on to state that various antitrust laws "shall be applicable to the business of insurance to the extent that such business is not regulated by state law." 

   In view of this language, it is not at first blush surprising that state regulators are at the forefront of those opposing repeal or even modification of McCarran-Ferguson. 

   The National Association of Insurance Commissioners recently released a position paper, passed unanimously by the state regulators, asserting that modification of the act would have no effect on the availability or affordability of liability insurance. 
They correctly argue that the liability-insurance crisis was more likely caused by excessive price competition -- which seems to be recurring now -- rather than oligopolistic price-fixing. 

   The commissioners go on to say that elimination of the antitrust exemption will subject the industry to years of uncertainty and instability from costly litigation and conflicting judicial interpretations. 
They further contend that repeal ultimately will create a regulatory vacuum into which the federal government will be drawn. 

   Finally, the commissioners argue, state laws already provide for enforcement actions against conspiracies to refuse to provide coverage or to set floors on insurance prices. 
The position paper concludes that repeal "could have an opposite, deleterious effect, including lessening competition by reducing the number of insurers currently in the market and imposing insurmountable barriers on entry into the industry." 

   A 22-company McCarran-Ferguson task force set up by the National Association of Independent Insurers, meanwhile, predicts the industry actually will contract if any of the proposed legislation is passed. 

   The industry and its regulators believe they are being punished for the erratic insurance price swings of recent years. 
That view is probably correct. 
Even the Reagan Justice Department's free marketers have not pressed similar action against antitrust immunities enjoyed by organized labor, agricultural cooperatives and various sports leagues. 
But aside from the partly valid concern that repeal of McCarran-Ferguson could create an onslaught of litigation, it is far from clear that enough force is left in the act as it now stands to warrant even worrying about it. 

   James Stone, president of the Plymouth Rock Assurance Corp. and former Massachusetts insurance commissioner, says that if the act is ever repealed or amended, he would view that as "symbolic." 
He predicts that any legislation will provide for exemptions for small companies, exchanges of claims-loss data and preservation of state regulation. 
Assistant Attorney General Charles F. Rule has made these prerequisites for any bill the administration could support. 

   Furthermore, it is not clear that even fear of a new litigation wave is justified. 
McCarran-Ferguson was passed, in large part, to encourage insurance competition by making it possible for small companies to share loss data. 
In recent years, however, it has been subjected to steady erosion by the federal courts. 

   The antitrust immunity has been severely narrowed by a three-pronged court test that limits the "business of insurance" to those situations involving the contractual relationship with the policyholder, the spreading of risk, and the absence of third parties outside the industry. 
Since no industry activity could meet all three tests, the antitrust immunity could be construed away entirely by a holding that insurance activity must meet all three requirements. 
Recent applications by the Supreme Court of the antitrust "business of insurance" tests to state law pre-emption questions also raise the question of whether the act can continue to be an effective barrier protecting state regulatory authority. 

   Proponents of a greater federal role note that many life-insurance products are already federally regulated by being subject to Securities and Exchange Commission registration. 
They argue the industry increasingly is faced with competition from other financial-service businesses that are, at least in part, federally regulated. 
Furthermore, it is far from certain that the national and increasingly international scope of the industry can be dealt with adequately by 50 different state regulators. 

   On the other hand, those who believe more federal regulation is needed ignore the fact that some federal regulatory agencies, such as the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, have demonstrated no more independence or competence in dealing with complex financial issues than have state insurance regulators. 
If the insurance industry wants it to be, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners can become an effective regulatory force. 
A vastly augmented staff for reporting and auditing would give it the ability to help state insurance departments provide the strong financial monitoring the industry desperately needs. 
Federal action is not so much dangerous as unnecessary and irrelevant. 

   The McCarran-Ferguson debate is nearsightedly procedural. 
The discussion deals with who will govern rather than how they will. 
In an environment where state legislatures are considering measures that would put the insurance industry into an economic and legal straitjacket, that is a debate the industry can ill-afford. 

   ---
   Mr. Hallett is a partner in the Los Angeles office of Coudert Brothers specializing in insurance. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
