ID: 308	RANK: 50	SCORE: 9.255070
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880708-0167 </DOCNO>
<HL> Unaccustomed Risk: Insurers, Long Free Of Antitrust Curbs, Face Rising Challenges --- Congress May Cut Immunity, And 19 States Are Suing; The Spark: Soaring Rates --- Giant Firms' Dominant Role </HL>
<AUTHOR> Peter Waldman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AET TIC FG STPL GRN ITT S CNA </CO>
<IN> INS </IN>
<G> CNG </G>
<TEXT>
   The insurance industry has long held a cozy place in the hearts of Congress. 

   In 1944, lawmakers exempted insurers from federal antitrust laws, allowing the state-regulated companies to share data and jointly fix premiums and policy provisions. 
In 1980, Congress broadened that immunity by prohibiting the Federal Trade Commission from investigating even nonantitrust aspects of the industry, squelching what had been a useful source of consumer information. 

   In return, the giant companies have long contributed generously to congressional campaigns. 

   Now, however, Congress is making the industry squirm. 
Faced with mounting evidence that some insurers have used their antitrust immunity to raise prices and limit coverage, the judiciary committees of both houses are considering bills to curtail that exemption. 
The bills still face several hurdles, but they could be signaling a shift in the regulatory winds. 

   "I've never seen {Rep. 
Peter} Rodino as committed to an antitrust issue as this," says one longtime congressional aide describing the attitude of the New Jersey Democrat who heads the House Judiciary Committee. 

   Documents obtained by The Wall Street Journal corroborate how the industry has worked in concert -- perfectly legally -- to fix prices, set restrictive policy terms and even influence legislation by reducing the availability of insurance. 
Congress granted the industry special immunity in the McCarran-Ferguson Act of 1944, which exempts the "business of insurance" from antitrust prosecution, provided the states regulate it. 
The immunity, however, specifically excludes acts of "boycott, coercion or intimidation." 

   Many federal and state regulators have testified against that exemption before Congress. 
"It is not cynical to suspect that at least some insurers have taken advantage of McCarran-Ferguson immunity to harm consumers," Daniel Oliver, the FTC chairman, told the Senate Judiciary Committee last year. 

   Though critics have charged for years that the industry's exemption allows a small cartel of dominant companies to manipulate the market, their cries for reform went largely unheeded until the insurance crisis of the mid-1980s. 
Then, seemingly overnight, insurers slashed coverage, jacked up premiums on many types of policies -- and sparked heated debate. 

   Insurers, backed by the Reagan administration, blamed the crisis on a rash of unexpected court decisions that greatly expanded their liability for certain claims. 
In particular, some judges in the late 1970s reversed prior industry and judicial interpretations and decided that damages from gradual, long-term pollution leaks were covered under standard liability policies. 
Courts also stunned insurers by upholding their liability for unpredictable, so-called cumulative injuries such as asbestosis. 

   Traumatized by these and other decisions, the industry said it needed to move fast to rewrite policies and raise rates. 
If the public didn't like that, the companies reasoned, it could press for changes in state tort laws. 

   But consumer groups, trial lawyers and some politicians -- with their own axes to grind -- or pockets to fill -- blame the crisis not on the courts but on collusion. 
Insurers, these critics contend, were merely exploiting their antitrust exemption to increase profits after years of reckless price-cutting. 
In 1986, when, for want of liability insurance, cities were curtailing services, directors were quitting corporate boards and charities were folding, the attorneys general of California, Texas and some other states launched a joint investigation of a possible conspiracy. 

   Their findings, lodged in antitrust suits filed last spring by 19 states against 32 insurer defendants, focus on the industry's cooperative practices expressly forbidden for most industries. 
Even the defendants' version of the facts of the case depicts a small old-boy network of giant-company executives who, by cajoling and sometimes bullying the industry's main trade group, jointly limited the liability insurance available in the U.S. 

   Specifically, the suits charge that Insurance Services Offices Inc., a trade group based in New York, succumbed to pressure from a small group of member companies in 1984 and rewrote industrywide policy standards to exclude coverage for pollution damages and for "retroactive" losses -- losses occurring before the starting date of a policy. 
These exclusions amounted to an illegal industry boycott, the suits charge. 

   The ISO says it began revising general-liability policy terms as early as 1977. 
Through the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, high interest rates were spurring a price-cutting frenzy among insurers striving to sell more policies and thereby raise capital for investment. 
Under those circumstances, proposals to adopt coverage restrictions that might have driven down premium income didn't get far. 

   "We have serious doubts about the fundamental soundness of an approach which is likely to create market problems," Lyman Baldwin Jr., a senior vice president of the Hartford Fire Insurance unit of ITT Corp., wrote in a 1979 letter to ISO President Daniel McNamara. 

   But by 1983, interest rates had dropped, and many insurers were reeling from the price war. 
That year, the industry's profits on general-liability insurance plunged to just $118 million from $847 million in 1979, according to the federal General Accounting Office. 
Efforts to revise policies and raise rates began in earnest. 

   The seemingly small changes in coverage for pollution and retroactive losses severely hurt some municipalities, small businesses and nonprofit organizations, which suddenly were paying much higher premiums for less coverage. 

   Milford, Mass., for example, had to pay $125,000 for liability insurance in 1987, four times more than in 1984. 
Yet, under its new policy, Milford had no coverage for pollution-related accidents, such as gas or sewage leaks, nor for any claims reported after the policy expired, even if the damages occurred while it was in force. 

   Likewise, the Texas Easter Seal Society, which has never been sued for any reason, watched its liability premiums soar nearly tenfold in the past three years, to $117,000, for reduced coverage. 
That additional money spent on insurance could provide therapy services for 100 disabled people, says Lila Coughran, the chapter's executive director. 

   In addition to the state suits, other cases show how insurers use the antitrust exemption to fight for common goals. 
In one instance, several insurers, including the Aetna Casualty &amp; Surety unit of Aetna Life &amp; Casualty Co. and Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., agreed to interpret Pennsylvania's no-fault auto-insurance law in a way that barred work-loss benefits for survivors of auto-accident victims. 
The state's supreme court ruled against that interpretation in 1980, but not before the insurers had saved millions of dollars in payouts. 

   Subsequently, in 1981, the husband of an auto-accident victim filed an antitrust suit against the Pennsylvania insurers, but a federal district judge dismissed it. 
The judge ruled that the "wholly intra-industry agreement" was akin to rate-making and therefore exempt from the antitrust laws under the McCarran-Ferguson Act. 

   In another case, five medical-malpractice insurers, including St. Paul Fire &amp; Marine Insurance Co. and Continental Casualty Co., simultaneously sent policy-cancellation letters to about 6,500 doctors, dentists, hospitals and clinics in West Virginia, after the state legislature passed a law they didn't like. 
Although that law, which was due to take effect in June 1986, limited awards in malpractice judgments, it also required insurers to base rates on policyholders' past claims records. 

   While both the law and the cancellations were pending, the state legislature, in a special session, repealed the rate-setting provision. 
West Virginia's attorney general filed an antitrust suit against the insurers and won a state-court order enjoining them from canceling policyholders en masse. 
The suit is still in litigation. 

   In the multistate suits, the states contend that four big U.S. insurers, along with several U.S. and British reinsurers, coerced the ISO into adopting the retroactivity and pollution exclusions in late 1984. 
Earlier that year, the ISO had issued standard forms without such restrictions. 

   Legal memorandums prepared for the ISO by its own attorneys indicate that some defendants used threats and other tactics to pressure the trade group into adopting the additional exclusions. 
Thomas Greene, a U.S. reinsurance broker who, the suits allege, was "enlisted" to pressure the ISO by defendants General Reinsurance Corp. and Hartford Fire Insurance, told the group's directors in June 1984 that without the added exclusions, the new policies "just {wouldn't} fly in the reinsurance market," according to an ISO memo. 
The broker added that there was "no chance" the reinsurers would "break ranks and give you what you want." 

   Reinsurers, many of whom are associated with Lloyd's of London, cover a portion of the risk underwritten by insurance companies and share in the premium. 
At the height of the alleged conspiracy, ISO documents show that senior ISO staff members traveled to London to confer with reinsurers about the new policy forms. 
At a dinner given by some British companies at London's posh Garrick Club, the ISO officials found their hosts "almost militant" in support of coverage restrictions in the new forms, the state complaints say. 

   ISO legal memorandums also show that in mid-1984, a senior ISO staffer tried to get Hartford Fire, a staunch proponent of added, industrywide restrictions, to compromise on less stringent provisions. 
But Hartford "refused to budge," according to the memorandums. 

   Hartford Fire and other defendants deny jointly coercing the ISO to adopt the narrower coverage. 
"We were proceeding to achieve Hartford's objectives for The Hartford" -- to get a policy "tool we could use in a very difficult marketplace," says Stephen Martin, Hartford's vice president for government relations. 

   The defendants also argue that because any threats by reinsurers to boycott the U.S. market would have affected only other insurance companies, the state plaintiffs lack standing to sue. 
They add that the final policy revisions were scrutinized by state regulators, a few of whom rejected the new forms. 
Essentially, the defendants contend, the ISO did merely what state regulators expressly license it to do: It melded its members' needs and opinions into policy standards for the market. 

   "In any meeting where people have different views, it's only natural that people of similar views are going to line up and present their views together," says Robert Pike, the general counsel of defendant Allstate Insurance Co., a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. 

   But the very fact that such collusive actions may have been legal is exactly what makes the states' allegations so damning, industry critics say. 
Of the ISO's 1,400 member companies, the same eight to 12 insurers controlled its executive committee throughout the four years during which it rewrote the new liability forms, according to a complaint filed by Texas. 
Moreover, five of those same companies -- Hartford, Aetna Life &amp; Casualty, Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., Travelers Insurance Co. of Travelers Corp. and USF&amp;G Corp. -- served on all the major committees responsible for drafting the new policies, according to the complaint. 

   "Many companies don't have the resources to devote to the ISO function," Hartford's Mr. Martin explains. 

   Theoretically, the ISO's own independent staff is supposed to bridle committee members' self-interest. 
But ISO documents show how weak its influence really is. 
In the summer of 1984, for example, ISO President McNamara wrote a "staff recommendation" advising the trade group's leadership to postpone adoption of the coverage restrictions, pending further study. 
This suggestion was promptly rejected by the chairman of the ISO's Commercial Lines Committee, who feared more study would cause "unacceptable delay," according to ISO legal memorandums. 

   Critics of the McCarran-Ferguson immunity say the state suits, and other evidence of concerted action, show how the law has fostered a herd-like mentality in the insurance industry. 
Although few argue that its repeal will solve the underlying economic forces driving the industry's vicious market cycles, many critics contend that antitrust restrictions would spur greater prudence at the companies and, ultimately, steadier competition in a broader array of products and price ranges. 

   "Absent the implicit assumption that collective wisdom is favored over independent analysis, we would see less lock-step conformity," says John Van de Kamp, California's attorney general. 

   The congressional bills wouldn't wipe out the McCarran-Ferguson Act. 
Instead, they would repeal the industry's immunity for price-fixing and other "monopolistic" practices while safeguarding state regulation and certain "pro-competitive" joint activities such as collection of actuarial data. 
Overall, though, insurers would be held to a much tighter standard in matters of collusion. 

   That might not be so bad, some insurance executives say. 
Right or wrong, McCarran-Ferguson has become such an embarrassment that the exemption may well have outlived its usefulness, they concede. 
"We may have come to the time where the misconceptions that stem from the McCarran-Ferguson Act are more than the industry can tolerate," says the general counsel of one defendant in the state suits. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
