ID: 308	RANK: 7	SCORE: 12.761089
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880801-0130 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Insurance Industry and Antitrust Law </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> INS </IN>
<G> CNG </G>
<TEXT>
   Contrary to your July 8 page-one article "Unaccustomed Risk," the insurance industry is not free of antitrust curbs. 
The McCarran-Ferguson Act simply delegates antitrust authority to the states in the same way that other key financial institutions such as banks or securities are regulated. 
This public-policy determination opts for a regulatory structure rather than free application of federal antitrust laws. 

   Moreover, the charge that McCarran allows price fixing to be "perfectly legal" is untrue. 
Rather, McCarran gives the states the authority to regulate insurance prices. 
Some state laws require the states to set rates, while others require state approval for certain rates. 
Some permit free and open competition. 
The point is that in every state, anticompetitive and discriminatory practices are prohibited. 
Insurance rates are developed exactly as state laws require, and no state requires -- or permits -- insurers to fix prices. 

   While the article focused on property/ casualty insurers, the McCarran proposals that have surfaced in the House Judiciary Committee are equally troubling to the life- and health-insurance business. 
Because the language of the proposed bill is imprecise and excessively broad, it would subject the joint activities of all insurers to antitrust challenge. 
In addition, it would raise the prospect of unnecessary, duplicative and possibly conflicting regulation at the hands of the Federal Trade Commission. 

   The cancellation of policyholders in West Virginia was based on legislation that would have destroyed the ability of medical-malpractice insurers to exercise their own judgment regarding applicants' insurability. 
In effect, the state was given the right to determine who was considered an acceptable insurance risk. 
No insurer can long survive if it is forced to accept applicants without regard to the risk that they pose. 
After a good-faith effort by insurers to reach a reasonable solution, a special session of the West Virginia Legislature amended the legislation. 
Despite the restrictive regulatory provisions that remained, several insurers rescinded their cancellation notices. 

   Further, the alleged boycott of pollution coverage is unfounded. 
Elimination of pollution coverage from commercial general liability policies was a necessary and inevitable reaction to increasingly broad court decisions. 
Insurers continued to cover pollution liability under a separate policy to eliminate possible judicial misinterpretation of contract language that could create exposure for which no premium had been collected. 

   Robert E. Vagley
   President
   American Insurance Association
   Co-chairman, Coalition for State Regulation of Insurance
   Washington
   ---
   Your story did not mention the benefits to insurance buyers resulting from insurers' permissible collective activities. 
The industry's collective activity under state regulation enhances buyers' ability to comparison-shop, and increases the affordability and availability of insurance in the marketplace by increasing individual insurers' confidence that their prices bear a reasonable relationship with their expected claim costs. 

   The benefits of the industry's limited antitrust exemption under the McCarran-Ferguson Act are recognized by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, which "unequivocally concluded that repeal of the limited exemption of McCarran would be severely detrimental to state regulation and the interests of the insurance-buying public." 

   In addition, the Risk &amp; Insurance Management Society, the association of corporate insurance buyers, declared in April: "RIMS recognizes that Congress gave insurance companies a limited antitrust exemption . . . to develop common policy forms so the public interest would be served." 
And the organization said: "RIMS suggests that repealing or modifying this act would not have prevented the last market crunch and will not moderate future cycles." 

   Jeffrey M. Yates, executive vice president of the Independent Insurance Agents of America, has said: "If McCarran-Ferguson is repealed and we no longer have standardized policy forms, insurance consumers would never be sure what coverages they were getting. 
Agents would be charged with the formidable task of evaluating some 3,500 inconsistent policy forms, making it nearly impossible to compare coverages." 

   These are not the self-serving conclusions of insurance companies. 
Rather, they are the considered views of the country's most knowledgeable public officials, business-insurance buyers and independent insurance professionals. 

   Fred R. Marcon
   President
   Insurance Services Office Inc. New York
</TEXT>
</DOC>
