ID: 145	RANK: 66	SCORE: 8.751267
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870706-0081 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Television:
Unequal Sequels
---
By Robert Goldberg</HL>
<DD> 07/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Call it a lack of guts. 
Call it a lack of brains. 
Television has begun to churn out sequels of its own series. 
CBS recently brought back two TV cult classics, "The Saint" and "Kung Fu," in updated formats on its Summer Playhouse anthology of would-be pilots. 

   Now personally, I'm a big fan of both Simon Templar, the debonair gentleman thief, and Kwai Chang Caine, the soft-spoken Chinese philosopher with fists of steel. 
Western playboy and Eastern ascetic, both have style, both have poise -- both, in short, are cool. 
With such heroes, the updaters couldn't fail to create shows that were at least partially entertaining. 
But their greatest sin was to take these larger-than-life characters and make them ordinary, mediocre. 

   Since he was first created by novelist Leslie Charteris in 1929, the Saint has been through all sorts of incarnations. 
In the 1930s, '40s and '50s, the dashing adventurer was portrayed by Edgar Barrier, Brian Aherne and Vincent Price on radio; Louis Hayward, George Sanders and Hugh Sinclair on film. 
Most memorably, Roger Moore brought Templar to life in the ITC TV series that began in 1963. 
Smooth, sophisticated, and almost absurdly handsome, Moore waltzed in and out of danger with a drink in one hand, a blonde in the other. 
His tuxedo never got wrinkled. 

   CBS's new pilot shows Templar (Andrew Clarke), now lodged in New York's Waldorf Astoria, coming to the aid of an old flame -- a beautiful (of course) ballerina who's been receiving bizarre threats. 
As Templar is drawn into the investigation, he becomes a prime suspect when a diamond tiara worn by the ballerina mysteriously vanishes. 

   As written by Peter Gethers and David Handler, and directed by James Frawley, this pilot aspired to some wit, and sometimes succeeded: "Dare to be great, inspector. 
Use both eyes." 
But more often, the action bumbled along and the dialogue was wooden: "What'll it be?" 
"Orange juice -- fresh squeezed." 
"Anything in it?" 
"Dom Perignon." 
"I should have known." 

   This "Saint" simply tried too hard. 
It wanted too much to be ritzy and glitzy and plush -- more like "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous" than a mystery show. 
The key to refinement is understatement, effortless panache (something the black-and-white '60s "Saint" understood), but that virtue was not much in evidence here. 
Champagne, however, was. 
I counted five bottles uncorked in one hour, enough to make anyone dizzy. 

   Templar's car is a flashy black italoid too Di Lusso for me to identify. 
Unfortunately, it was so low-slung, and the gullwing doors so difficult to operate, that Mr. Clarke couldn't get in or out of the car without going through all sorts of awkward contortions -- the same sort of contortions the script went through to get that sports car on the screen nine separate times, often accompanied by dialogue like "that's some car you have there." 
The lesson here: More is definitely less. 

   There were no cars in the old "Kung Fu," which ran from 1973 to 1975. 
It was an Eastern western -- the tale of Kwai Chang Caine (David Carradine), a Chinese monk wandering America's Western frontier in the late 1800s. 
The historic setting, the mystical nature of the hero, the use of philosophy as entertainment (a liberal sprinkling of Confucian fortune cookies), not to mention extended flashbacks and wonderful slow-motion fight scenes -- all added up to a lyrical show of some genuine pre-automotive originality. 

   "Kung Fu: The Next Generation," the story of the great and great-great grandson of Kwai Chang Caine, is set in modern day Los Angeles. 
A lot has been lost over the years. 
David Darlow stars as Caine, the father, a serene kung fu instructor, and Brandon Lee (Bruce Lee's son) as his kid, Johnny, a troubled street youth who's gone bad. 

   The minimal plot involves Caine's effort to make his alienated son give up second-story work, turn in his criminal buddies, and come back into the fold. 
Mr. Darlow does have some of the quiet authority of Mr. Carradine, and the show, as written by Danny Bilson and Paul De Meo, and directed by Tony Wharmby, does have occasional touches that bring to mind its progenitor -- an intriguing martial-arts demo and a gentle hero who won't drive or eat meat. 

   But Lee's performance has just one note. 
He's a sullen, snotty kid, and replacing life-and-death conflicts in the Old West with broken-home family problems in L.A. seems a poor trade. 
Even the fight scenes were weakly choreographed -- a few limp side kicks. 
The only thing truly Eastern about this show was the gong Caine had in his backyard. 

   Throughout this Summer Playhouse series, CBS is inviting viewers to call in their approval or disapproval of each show. 
You might term this the ultimate democracy -- every person a TV critic. 

   Of course, networks have been tracking viewers for years through Nielsen ratings, by having sample households keep weekly TV diaries. 
The latest technology -- push-button electronic units known as "peoplemeters" that give the networks immediate feedback -- will go into widespread operation this fall. 
But CBS's call-in idea is something different -- like a focus group, it measures opinions, not the size of the viewing audience. 
Approve is (900) 220-2311; disapprove is (900) 220-2322. 

   Results for the first two shows were overwhelmingly positive: "The Saint" received 40,218 favorable votes to 3,715 unfavorable (a 92% approval rating) and "Kung Fu" scored 87,183 positive to 2,860 negative (or 97% approval). 
One could, of course, quibble with the sampling method: Viewers who dislike a program would seem more likely to vote with their on/off switch than with their telephone (especially at 50 cents a call). 
And no one knows exactly what the votes are being used for -- these shows, after all, are the pilots that didn't make it into the fall lineup. 
Is this vote going to change that? 
Don't bet on it. 

   Either way, I dialed (900) 220-2322 both times, and I was heavily outvoted. 
But they didn't have a number for the vote I really wanted to cast: Bring back the old series. 

   ---
   Mr. Goldberg watches television in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
