ID: 145	RANK: 93	SCORE: 7.719698
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880318-0120 </DOCNO>
<HL> Washington Wire: A Special Weekly Report From The Wall Street Journal's Capital Bureau --- Compiled by Rich Jaroslovsky </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LATAM FREST </CO>
<IN> MON BNK NUK ARO </IN>
<G> TRE CNG FED EXE SUP ERG </G>
<TEXT>
   BUSH EXPECTS to unify the GOP easily and prepare for November. 

   He figures to wrap up the nomination shortly after winning almost all of New York's 136 delegates next month. 
Strategists plan to keep him traveling around the country, developing broader themes but avoiding specifics. 
He will continue to shun press inquiries, reducing chances for gaffes; despite the media's complaints, advisers believe the public doesn't care. 
Bush won't pressure Dole or Robertson to get out, instead basically ignoring them. 

   Bush partisans argue that Reagan's vice president is uniquely able to unify disparate GOP elements. 
"There's nobody better to do this," says campaign manager Lee Atwater. 
Dole backers lack strong commitment to their candidate, Bush aides say; already, crows one, "there are Dole people calling in droves." 
Bush aides also figure the right wing will have no place else to go. 

   Some GOP insiders predict Treasury Secretary Baker will step in to direct the fall campaign. 

   LATIN DEBT-RELIEF plans proliferate as debtors' woes mount. 

   New proposals are prompted by the Baker plan's failure to spur big new bank lending and by the slowdown in world growth. 
Ohio Rep. Pease and American Express chief Robinson each suggest a special agency to buy the debt. 
Proponents hope to tie such a plan to a White House request for World Bank funds. 
Former White House Counsel Lloyd Cutler also prepares a plan. 

   But Treasury chief Baker adamantly opposes all such proposals. 
The administration will probably seek short-term solutions as problems arise. 
Brazil and Argentina are patching together new short-term deals, but continuing economic troubles suggest they may need still more help. 
Elections in Mexico and Venezuela may politicize the issue further. 

   SHULTZ ATTAINS undisputed primacy in foreign policy. 

   His collegial style finally dominates. 
The plan to dispatch troops to Honduras originated in the Pentagon, but Shultz strongly backed it and the decision was made even though defense chief Carlucci was away. 
It aroused little dissent in the administration. 

   Shultz's emergence leaves the field clearer to push through a strategic-arms agreement without Pentagon resistance; he meets with Shevardnadze next week. 
But the odds grow slimmer for such a pact before the end of Reagan's term because of Soviet foot-dragging and verification issues. 
And some observers doubt that Shultz will use his newfound clout for bold initiatives. 

   "He often tells friends that he is more of a gardener than an architect," says one State Department official. 

   CUOMO'S COOLNESS toward Dukakis reflects a belief that the Massachusetts governor lacks any clear message. 
Cuomo also resents what he considers heavy-handed tactics by some Dukakis partisans to win his endorsement; one suggested that the Dukakis nomination train was leaving the station and he had better climb aboard. 

   STARTING OVER: The administration seeks new candidates to fill a 15-month-old vacancy on the Fed. 
Philadelphia banker Frederick Heldring fails to impress top officials; former Reagan aide Wendell W. Gunn runs afoul of residency rules. 
Unless the White House acts soon, officials warn, the Senate is likely to force it to let the next president make the appointment. 

   SPLIT DECISION: Despite his economic populist arguments, Jackson ran his worst in the Illinois primary among blue-collar whites, according to NBC News exit polls. 
He won just 4% of such votes. 
At the same time, he did his best among whites with those who had more than a college degree, winning 12% of such voters. 

   RETIREMENT RUMORS swirl around Supreme Court Justice White. 
The word at some law schools and in judges' and law clerks' networks is that White will step down in June 1989. 
Some of his former clerks suggest he would like to go home to Colorado while in good health. 
But the 70-year-old justice says he has "no plans" to leave. 

   ENTHUSIASM ERODES for the costly superconducting super collider. 

   The huge atom smasher, the administration's pet science project, is under attack as a "super budget-buster." 
Support started to fade after the list of states vying for it was cut from 25 to seven. 
"Now that site selection has been narrowed, there are more people who don't see the wisdom of spending $5 billion," says a congressional aide. 

   The administration wants $363 million for the collider in fiscal 1989, including the first construction money. 
But Sen. Johnston, chairman of the relevant Senate Appropriations subcommittee, warns that the request is too big. 
The House Budget Committee recommends only $100 million, but the real decision there will come in a House Appropriations subcommittee. 

   GOP Reps. 
Ritter and Schneider and Democrat MacKay argue that the collider drains resources from more important scientific projects. 

   MINOR MEMOS: The Labor Department's 75th-anniversary banquet featured music from "The Bridge on the River Kwai" -- a movie about Japanese use of forced labor in World War II -- as well as a cake decorated with small American flags that were made in Japan. . . . 
British reporters become alarmed as candidate Simon visits a bank and is photographed in front of a sign urging IRA contributions. . . . 
Capitol Hill wags refer to the serious-minded Albert Gore as "prematurely grave." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
