ID: 193	RANK: 32	SCORE: 17.693312
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880111-0113 </DOCNO>
<HL> Stock Market Crash Deals a Harsh Blow To the Suffering Small-Aircraft Market </HL>
<AUTHOR> Francis C. Brown III (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> ARO AIR </IN>
<G> CNG </G>
<TEXT>
   What else can go wrong in the market for corporate and private planes? 

   In recent years, a series of credibility-damaging accidents has led to huge product-liability awards. 
Deregulation has sparked a boom in commercial air traffic that threatens to squeeze private jets out of major airports. 
Lagging technology, the soaring costs of buying and operating the planes, widespread corporate cost-consciousness and the woes of the industry's best customers -- the oil companies -- have also taken their toll. 

   And that was before Black Monday. 

   The stock market crash of last Oct. 19 has exacerbated the situation and threatens to dash, at least for now, any glimmering hope for recovery in the industry, which produced only about 1,000 planes in 1987, down from around 17,000 in 1979. 
If the decline persists, the general public is likely to feel the impact as well, particularly in rural areas where the big airlines don't fly anymore. 

   "We've got an industry that is sort of at an economic crossroads here," says Michael Moore, executive vice president of Executive Air Fleet, a PHH Group Inc. subsidiary that manages corporate aircraft fleets. 

   Nobody is predicting the demise of general aviation, the catchall description for a sector made up largely of private and corporate jets, but which also encompasses small commuter airlines. 
Some 211,000 small aircraft fill the air lanes these days, dwarfing the 4,600-plane commercial airline fleet and logging four times the flight hours. 

   "We're the biggest airline in the country by a hell of a margin," says John Baker, president of the Aircraft Owners &amp; Pilots Association. 
"If we're going to have a national aviation system, then we've got to be a part of it." 

   But the past decade hasn't been kind to the industry. 
Manufacturers' reputations and bottom lines were seriously damaged by a series of small-craft accidents. 
In 1986 alone, the industry shelled out $210 million in product-liability damages, up nearly tenfold from a decade earlier. (The industry is pushing for federal legislation that could offer some relief.) 

   Such liability awards have contributed mightily to the soaring expense of owning and operating small aircraft, as have rising fuel costs and increased landing and hangar fees. 
Moreover, the federal government last month increased to 23 from nine the number of airports requiring new radar equipment on small planes. 
Cost to private-plane owners: about $2,000 per plane. 
Executive Air estimates that annual operating costs currently range from $250,000 for a small turboprop to $1.5 million for a top-of-the-line corporate jet. 

   "We're getting plastered across the board on costs," Mr. Baker says. 
"There are damn few companies that can afford to operate the machines." 

   Indeed, many companies have dumped their aircraft in recent years. 
While 336 of the Fortune 500 companies still operate business aircraft, according to a recent survey by Wichita, Kan.-based Aviation Data Services, that's down about 10% in just four years. 

   The oil-patch depression has wreaked the most damage. 
In 1980, oil companies accounted for 20% of unit sales of new business jets; by 1986, they were providing just 8% of a shrunken sales base. 

   Ironically, private-aircraft manufacturers were seeing signs of a minor recovery just before the stock market crash. 
Used-plane prices had risen as the glut of older planes began to diminish, making new planes more price-competitive. 
Some technologically advanced new models were drawing increased interest. 
The snazzy Gulfstream IV, made by a Chrysler Corp. subsidiary and carrying a sticker price of $18 million, built up a 100-order backlog even before it was certified by the Federal Aviation Administration last year. 

   In addition, the commercial carriers' restructuring of their routes into hub-and-spoke configurations eliminated direct flights to many rural locales, forcing some companies to start private fleets. 
"We may need several changes of planes to get from here to Timbuktu if we fly commercial," says Ray Townsend, chairman of Des Moines, Iowa-based Townsend Engineering, which uses three planes to service its predominantly rural clientele. 

   But the market crash may have killed the nascent turnaround, as exemplified by the decision of General Dynamics Corp.'s Cessna Aircraft subsidiary to shut down production this month, idling 1,400 of its 3,900 workers. 
Cessna, the world's largest manufacturer of private aircraft, has also laid off 250 employees indefinitely and plans a reduced production schedule for February. 
Beech Aircraft Corp., a Raytheon Co. subsidiary, says it also has "noticed an effect" from the stock market crash in some product lines as customers have deferred orders. 
Manufacturers fear that, if a recession hits, the current run of deferred orders may quickly turn into a stampede of cancellations. 

   As if all that weren't enough, small aircraft are facing another serious problem -- finding room at the inn. 
The FAA has classified 16 U.S. airports as "seriously congested," and 42 others are expected to face capacity crunches by the year 2000. 
Proposed solutions have centered on diverting small craft to less convenient "reliever" airports. 
"We're getting pushed further and further out, and the utility is increasingly diminished," says Mr. Baker of the aircraft owners' group. 

   Pressure is mounting on several fronts. 
Last month, for example, the Massachusetts Port Authority proposed higher landing and terminal fees for small planes using Boston's Logan Airport. 
The authority is also contemplating higher fees for small planes landing during peak hours. 

   Democratic Rep. Charles Schumer of New York is pushing for federal legislation that would give scheduled airline flights preference at crowded airports. 
"The idea that a private LearJet should take precedence over a Boeing 747 with 300 people on it at a crowded airport makes no sense," he says. 

   Such moves could further weaken the small-plane market and cause a variety of ripple effects. 
"It could have a devastating impact on small communities," says Jonathan Howe, president of the National Business Aircraft Association. 

   For one thing, the proposals could hurt the commuter airlines servicing the rural routes that major carriers have abandoned in recent years. 
Should other agencies adopt plans similar to, say, the Massachusetts authority's proposal, commuter lines warn that they would face sharply increased costs and a choice between raising fares and drastically cutting service. 

   Moreover, some small companies say increased costs or new airport restrictions could force them to give up their planes and relocate to more urban areas, which would deal a blow to small airports and the communities they serve. 
"We would pack up our things and move to another city," says Greg Brown, president of Dr. Design Inc., a West Lafayette, Ind., consulting firm that uses business planes to visit clients in remote locales. 
Without small aircraft, he explains, "not only could I not operate, but many of them could not operate." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
