ID: 193	RANK: 79	SCORE: 13.773264
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870407-0013 </DOCNO>
<HL> Collision Course? 'Satellite' Fields
Seen Less Safe Than Major Airports
---
By Jonathan Dahl
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AIRLINES (AIR)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Russell Kelsey is in charge of air-traffic safety at California's Ontario Airport. 
He says it's safer to fly elsewhere. 

   The reason: Last year, eight near midair collisions were reported at Ontario, a "satellite" airport 45 miles east of giant Los Angeles International Airport. 
In the past two years, two United Airlines jets nearly collided with helicopters at Ontario. 
An Alaska Airlines flight dodged a glider. 
And a Delta jet came within 150 feet of a hot-air balloon. 

   The scare factor is far worse at satellite airports than at major airports, say pilots and air-traffic controllers. 
Satellites -- secondary facilities in or near big cities -- are becoming increasingly popular, partly for their convenience. 
But a review of Federal Aviation Administration reports shows that each of eight leading satellite airports had more near collisions in 1986 than its closest major airport. 

   In Chicago, for example, there were nine reported near misses around Midway Airport, compared with four at O'Hare International Airport -- even though O'Hare handles three times more traffic. 
One Midway Airlines pilot who had a near collision with a small plane recalls seeing "the startled look on the other guy's face." 

   "What's it like to fly these airports?" asks D.B. Robinson, a United pilot for 22 years. 
"Let's put it this way: We're just damn lucky." 

   Satellite airports harbor a greater potential for accidents because they are used more by general-aviation aircraft, which are mostly small planes and helicopters. 
The pilots of these aircraft are often less skilled than their commercial counterparts; some are just learning to fly. 
Also, many of the satellites are close to other airports, which launch still more small planes into the sky. 
And air-traffic control at satellites is limited. 
For example, within 30 seconds of takeoff from Ontario, most flights leave regulated airspace -- the territory where all aircraft must be in contact with controllers. 

   "The environment is more protected at major airports," says Dick Russell, a Los Angeles-area safety coordinator for the Air Line Pilots Association. 
"At satellites, it's every man for himself." 

   FAA officials don't deny that there are differences in safety between satellite and major airports. 
Even so, they insist, satellites are safe. 
They say that both near and actual collisions are extremely rare at satellites. 
And they add that a near collision isn't always dangerous, because pilots have varying standards for declaring one. 

   Many pilots, though, say there have been too many close calls at satellites. 
Keith Sleater, a Frontier Airlines pilot, sweated through three near collisions in four months last year at John Wayne Airport in Santa Ana, Calif., outside Los Angeles. 
In an FAA report, he concluded: "In my opinion, a disaster at (John Wayne) is not only possible, it is likely." 
In an anonymous report after another near miss, a pilot said safety must be improved at California's Burbank Airport "quickly before someone gets killed." 

   Such concerns weren't common a few years ago because airlines didn't fly much to satellite airports. 
But crowding at major airports has stirred a traffic boom at the satellites. 
Commercial takeoffs and landings at John Wayne swelled 48% in 1986. 
Continental Airlines moved into Houston's Hobby Airport last year, and yesterday United started service at Midway, where 1986 passenger volume jumped almost a third to 3.9 million. 
Travelers welcome the trend; most satellites are either closer to downtown or have fewer parking and baggage hassles than major airports. 

   As airlines have moved into satellite fields, though, they've run afoul of general-aviation aircraft. 
Such planes are common at satellites partly because at such fields they don't face the hefty landing fees levied at most big airports. 
So while general aviation comprises only 9% of the traffic at San Francisco International Airport, it represents more than two-thirds of the traffic at nearby Oakland International. 

   Oakland and other satellites try to segregate general aviation from commercial aircraft, partly by assigning them to separate runways. 
But the system doesn't always work -- because, controllers say, general-aviation pilots are prone to mistakes. 
In late 1985, the pilot of a small private plane got lost taxiing in the dark at San Jose International Airport. 
The plane wound up on the wrong runway, forcing a Trans World Airlines jet to abort a landing. 
The small-plane's pilot, who had never before used the airport, discovered that he was on the wrong runway only when the TWA jet's landing lights showed up in his rear-view mirror. 

   An AirCal 737 had to abort a landing in February 1986 at John Wayne because a small plane practicing a landing overshot its runway and tried to touch down on another landing strip. 
"He came right in front of us," recalls AirCal pilot Stephen Telepman. 
"You'd think they wouldn't let amateurs fly around big jets, but they do. 
It's goofy." 

   Many pilots are also disturbed by the air-traffic control system at satellites. 
Planes within 25 to 30 miles of most major airports are required at certain altitudes to contact controllers and to use devices that make them easy to spot on radar. 
But regulated airspace at Long Beach Airport and San Jose, as set by the FAA, extends only five miles for flights heading south. 
Small planes beyond these ranges don't have to contact the towers, so controllers must spot them on radar and pilots must keep a close watch. 

   FAA officials say the system, while not ideal, works. 
"If there was a problem, the safety record wouldn't be so good," says Robert Hughes, an FAA traffic operations specialist. 
But pilots say they sometimes have only seconds to react after spotting a small plane, and controllers complain that radar screens at satellites are flooded with traffic from surrounding airports. 

   Burbank Airport, for example, is only six miles from Van Nuys Airport, the nation's busiest general-aviation facility. 
Two big general-aviation fields, a naval air base and a public airport with heavy glider activity are within 15 miles of San Jose. 
"You've got all these planes that can come from anywhere and that you're not talking to," says Joseph Bellino, an official in Chicago for the National Air Traffic Controllers Association. 

   Ground facilities also are less safe at the satellites than at major airports, many pilots say. 
Most satellites, built decades ago, lack modern runway layouts. 
At Long Beach Airport, all five runways intersect; at Los Angeles International, none do. 
Burbank's longest runway is 6,900 feet, compared with 12,000 feet at Los Angeles. 
Burbank's 55-year-old passenger terminal is only about 110 yards from one runway -- half the distance the FAA prefers. 

   "You're putting modern-day jets in World War II airports," says John Galipault, president of the Aviation Safety Institute, a private Worthington, Ohio-based group that investigates air-safety issues. 

   Still, the FAA has upgraded navigational equipment at some satellites. 
It recently expanded the regulated airspace at Hobby, plans to do so this month at Oakland, and is considering similar moves at Midway and San Jose. 
But the agency moves slowly in such matters; it first considered widening the regulated airspace at San Jose eight years ago. 

   What's more, FAA officials don't agree on how to handle general aviation at satellites. 
Keith Potts, FAA associate administrator for air traffic, maintains that small-airplane owners have every right to fly out of satellites. 
"Those people paid the taxes to build those airports," he says. 

   Some officials, however, say smaller planes should eventually be banned from satellites. 
"I know a doctor who likes to be able to hop in a plane and fly whenever he wants," says Gerald Walton, an FAA official who until recently was the tower manager at Burbank. 
"But I'm not sure the general public is best served by that." 

   ---

                      Airport Dangers
   Satellite airports had more near collisions in 1986 than
their closest major airport, even though the major airports
were busier. Here's a comparison involving the top eight
satellite airports, with the major airport for each city
listed first.
                                 Near
                           Collisions          Rate*
 Chicago
 O'Hare                           4             0.5
 Midway                           9             4.3
 Houston
 Houston Intl.                    0             0.0
 Hobby                           10             3.6
 Los Angeles area
 Los Angeles Intl.                7             1.2
 Long Beach                      12             2.9
 Burbank                          9             3.9
 John Wayne (Santa Ana)           9             1.6
 Ontario                          8             6.0
 San Francisco Bay area
 San Francisco Int.               2             0.5
 San Jose                         9             2.6
 Oakland                          6             1.6
 *Per 100,000 takeoffs and landings
 Source: FAA reports on near collisions in midair within 15
miles of the airport.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
