ID: 189	RANK: 63	SCORE: 14.732091
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871202-0070 </DOCNO>
<HL> Problems Appear to Stall NBC's Talks
On Investment in Turner Broadcasting
---
By Peter Waldman and Laura Landro
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> TBSA GE TL TCOMA
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Talks between National Broadcasting Co. and Turner Broadcasting System Inc. about a possible NBC investment in Turner appear to be in limbo until a number of problems are resolved. 

   According to sources, NBC now wants to consider a joint venture with Turner instead of a proposed $400 million equity investment. 
One NBC executive said the company wants to pursue a deal but is concerned about its return on an equity investment. 
"We're looking for another way Turner could be helped that's attractive to us," the executive said. 

   In addition, the talks are snagged because of the varied agendas of other investors in Turner, particularly Time Inc. Time, which owns 11.5% of the Atlanta-based cable concern, currently has an option to gain control of Turner's Cable News Network. 
According to executives involved in the negotiations, Time is under pressure to give up the option but is resisting. 

   As previously reported, NBC, a unit of General Electric Co., and Turner Broadcasting met Monday to discuss a possible NBC infusion of about $400 million into Turner in return for an approximately 25% stake in the company. 
NBC and Turner are also discussing the creation of a new cable program network, tentatively called Turner Network Television. 

   Time's option allows it to assume full control of CNN, an all-news channel, should Turner's founder, chairman, and 51% holder, Ted Turner, ever decide to sell voting control of the company. 
Time won that option last spring, when it agreed to join a group of cable operators that invested $500 million for control of 37% of Turner's voting stock. 

   NBC, which tried unsuccessfully to buy a stake in CNN two years ago, wants Time to relinquish its CNN option before it will invest in Turner, according to executives and investment bankers privy to the talks. 
And they say that Time's refusal to surrender its option is an impediment to a deal between Turner and NBC. 

   Time executives declined to discuss specifics of the talks with NBC. However, they did indicate that the provision giving them the option to control CNN isn't negotiable. 
"We want to be a player in Cable News Network down the road," said one Time executive. 

   NBC officials declined comment. 

   Caught in the middle of the dispute is the nation's largest cable operator, Tele-Communications Inc., which acquired a 10.1% stake in Turner with the infusion last spring. 
As part of the cable group that invested in Turner, Tele-Communications is contractually obligated to vote its Turner shares with Time. 
But it is also eager to see a deal with NBC that would help launch a new cable programming network. 
According to executives of other cable companies in the Turner group, Tele-Communications' president, John Malone, has been pressing Time to waive its rights to CNN. 

   Mr. Malone couldn't be reached for comment. 
The cable executives said Mr. Malone has suggested that Time waive the rights in return for managerial control of CNN. However, it isn't clear whether that would be acceptable to Mr. Turner or to NBC -- a situation that further muddies the waters in an already difficult negotiation. 

   It also isn't clear whether NBC has offered Time any financial incentive to give up its CNN option. 
As previously reported, Mr. Malone, Mr. Turner, and N.J. Nicholas, president of Time, met with NBC Chairman Robert Wright to discuss the NBC proposal Monday. 

   Mr. Turner and Mr. Nicholas also weren't available to comment. 

   Associates of Mr. Turner say he doesn't want Time to get control of CNN. "CNN is Ted's baby, and he sees NBC as the lesser of two evils," says one investment banker involved in the negotiations. 
Mr. Turner prefers NBC, according to one associate, because the network would help start a new entertainment network and presumably allow him a continuing role in CNN. 
He added that Mr. Turner fears Time's aim is to push him out of CNN altogether. 

   Time executives strongly denied their aim is to unseat Mr. Turner. 
"There is no overt or covert action to get Ted out," said one Time executive. 
"We'd like to see Ted be part of this company for quite a while." 
He acknowledged, however, that "if he ever does decide to sell out, it's to our advantage -- we get what we want." 

   That worries some of Time's cable partners in Turner Broadcasting. 
Tele-Communications and other companies that invested in Turner have long worried about Time's growing clout in cable programming. 
In addition to controlling the nation's second-largest cable system operator, Time owns Home Box Office, the largest pay television network. 

   But the cable operators note that at least Time is committed to the cable business; they are more ambivalent about NBC's agenda. 
While they welcome the network's interest in funding new cable programming, they are concerned about such issues as whether NBC will preserve CNN as a service exclusively devoted to cable. 
"When the cable industry bought a stake in cable they bought assurances about the direction of Turner," one cable operator said. 
"NBC's first commitment is to its broadcast network." 

   Despite the problems, one NBC executive said there will probably be some type of deal. 
"All the parties seem to want to have something happen," he said. 

   But one executive at Time said he doubted there will be a quick resolution. 
"When NBC offers something Ted is willing to accept financially, there will be a deal," he said, "but the odds of something coming together soon aren't high." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
