ID: 254	RANK: 100	SCORE: 3.374817
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881014-0027 </DOCNO>
<HL> Dukakis Justices v. the People </HL>
<AUTHOR> Charles J. Cooper </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   "Michael Dukakis has a very clear track record picking the best judges," judges who are "not ideologically attuned one way or the other. 
He's had a good nonpartisan screening mechanism to pick them." 
So claimed Sen. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.) in a recent MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour discussion of the next president's judicial appointments, an issue that also came up during last night's debate. 
Rejecting the concern that a President Dukakis would be influenced by fellow members of the American Civil Liberties Union to appoint liberal judicial activists, Sen. Leahy predicted that a Dukakis Supreme Court would be "basically centrist." 

   Yet a study of Mr. Dukakis's most important judicial appointments -- the two justices he added to the seven-member Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court -- reveals judges starkly at odds with such a description. 
The opinions and votes of Justice Paul Liacos, a former law school professor, and Justice Ruth Abrams, a former trial court judge, establish them as fervent proponents of the ACLU's liberal social agenda, committed to imposing it on state residents through judicial decree. 

   Justices Liacos and Abrams believe that the death penalty is "cruel or unusual punishment" in all circumstances and have voted repeatedly to strike down efforts by the people of Massachusetts to enact one. 
In 1977, they joined a majority opinion holding that a capital punishment statute (which all the justices acknowledged was constitutional under U.S. Supreme Court precedent) violated the "cruel or unusual punishment" clause of the state constitution. 
They did so again in 1980, when, in a concurring opinion, Justice Liacos all but admitted that he was simply substituting his judgment for that of the Massachusetts Legislature, asserting that the death penalty is "antithetical to the spiritual freedom that underlies the democratic mind." 

   The people fought back, this time amending the state constitution to say that none of its provisions "shall be construed as prohibiting the imposition of the punishment of death." 
Yet in a 1984 case involving the murder of a policeman, the court once again invalidated the statute under the procedural provisions of the state constitution. 

   Capital punishment is not the only criminal penalty that Justices Liacos and Abrams would forbid. 
Alone among their colleagues, the Dukakis appointees have opined that a mandatory 25-year jail sentence for major drug traffickers would constitute cruel or unusual punishment. 

   Nor is their solicitude for criminal defendants limited to leniency in sentencing. 
In a 1985 case, for example, Justice Liacos argued that a murder conviction should be overturned because of a flawed jury instruction, even though the instruction was favorable to the defendant. 
And in a particularly shocking case, Justice Liacos voted to overturn the criminal conviction of a father who had raped his daughters, ages six and eight. 
The girls had been allowed to testify via a camera placed outside the courtroom, and Justice Liacos stated that this procedure was an unconstitutional denial of the defendant's rights, even though the defendant could see and hear the testimony on camera and could communicate with his attorney, who was allowed to cross-examine. 

   Justices Liacos and Abrams have also objected to the "good faith" exception to the U.S. Supreme Court's "exclusionary rule." 
In one murder case, for example, they excluded from trial evidence from a search conducted by police in good-faith reliance on a warrant issued by a magistrate who, it was later noticed, had not struck through certain lines on the printed warrant form. 
The U.S. Supreme Court reversed them. 

   In many other contexts, the Dukakis appointees have hamstrung law enforcement efforts by inventing criminal protections nowhere found in the Constitution or in Supreme Court precedent. 
For example, Justice Liacos believes that simply writing down the telephone numbers of calls made by or to a suspected criminal is prohibited by the Fourth Amendment. 
Indeed, one Liacos opinion even held that a police informant may not record a face-to-face conversation with a suspect even though the U.S. Supreme Court has upheld such a "body-wire" recording. 
Earlier this year Justice Liacos reduced the bail of a Costa Rican cocaine dealer to $50,000 from $500,000, although five lower courts had agreed on the higher figure. 
Not surprisingly, the drug pusher fled the country. 

   The activist rulings of Dukakis appointees have by no means been confined to criminal cases. 
For example, in addition to supporting Mr. Dukakis in the now-famous Pledge of Allegiance case, Justices Liacos and Abrams have substituted their policy judgments for those of the state's elected representatives on the issue of abortion. 
In one illustrative case, they voted to strike down a state statute denying public funds for abortions under a provision they found "implicit" in the Massachusetts constitution. 
The U.S. Supreme Court had previously rejected virtually the same argument in three different cases, reasoning that the government's failure to fund a constitutionally protected "liberty" such as abortion does not deprive a person of that liberty. 

   Another cutting-edge issue on which the Dukakis appointees subscribe to liberal orthodoxy is gay rights. 
In one case they held that the fact that a woman is a lesbian should not have been considered by the lower court in determining whether she should regain custody of a child she had previously handed over to a guardian. 

   Similarly, in a series of decisions allegedly rooted in the U.S. Supreme Court's privacy decisions, they have asserted that statutory prohibitions against certain sexual activities cannot apply to private consensual conduct by adults -- and they have unusual ideas about what conduct is private. 
They have stated, for example, that sex acts performed in the front seat of a car in a parking lot adjoining a public road are private, and reached a similar conclusion with respect to a peep-show cubicle in a pornographic movie theater. 

   The Dukakis justices have also taken the lead in making communities powerless to prohibit child pornography or otherwise to resist the intrusion of obscene materials. 
In one case, involving a stepfather who took sexually provocative photographs of his 15-year-old stepdaughter, clad only in a red scarf and bikini-type white panties, Justices Liacos and Abrams joined the majority opinion in invalidating the state's child pornography statute, holding that posing a 15-year-old for such photographs is protected by the free speech clause of the First Amendment. (Although Mr. Dukakis recently expressed disagreement with the ACLU's efforts to shield child pornography under the First Amendment, he failed to note that his high court appointees are in accord with the ACLU's position.) 

   Moreover, Justices Liacos and Abrams, alone among their colleagues, believe that even plainly obscene material must be permitted unless thrust upon the public, even though it has long been held by the U.S. and Massachusetts supreme courts that obscenity is not protected under the First Amendment. 
Justice Liacos has also opined that communities may not deny liquor licenses to nude bars or forbid the nude dancers to mingle with patrons, because that interferes with the dancers' rights of free expression and association. 

   Justices Liacos and Abrams have also contributed to the national tort liability crisis, inventing ingenious theories by which businesses must pay for injuries they have not caused. 
For example, the Dukakis appointees held a hospital liable to a woman patient raped by a doctor, even though the rape did not occur on the hospital's premises and the doctor's only connection with the hospital was that he possessed staff visiting privileges there. 
For similar reasons, a bus company was held liable for a murder in its terminal. 
They have even opined that police are constitutionally obliged to pay the hospital bills of a suspect who is injured trying to escape arrest, a view unanimously rejected by the U.S. Supreme Court. 

   In sum, Sen. Leahy's description of judges "not ideologically attuned one way or another" is thoroughly refuted by the record of Mr. Dukakis's two appointees to the Massachusetts Supreme Court. 
Nor can the governor evade responsibility for appointing them by pointing to his use of the state bar's nonpartisan, merit-based judicial screening committee. 
Not only has Mr. Dukakis previously been quick to take credit for his appointments, he appointed Justice Liacos over the repeated objections of the state bar committee. 

   Both Justice Liacos and Justice Abrams have been named in national legal publications as leading candidates for appointment to the U.S. Supreme Court in a Dukakis administration. 
The Dukakis campaign has devoted considerable resources to diverting the electorate's attention from the governor's membership in the ACLU to the prospect of a "President Quayle." 
The voters would be well-advised to consider the prospect of a "Mr. 
Justice Liacos." 

   ---
   Mr. Cooper, a lawyer in Washington, was a U.S. assistant attorney general from 1985 until July. 
Michael A. Carvin, also a lawyer in Washington, assisted in the preparation of this article. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
