ID: 254	RANK: 22	SCORE: 5.846204
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870313-0125 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

Isn't Easy to Follow
---
Premier of Queensland Mixes
Bold Views, Weak Syntax;
Giant Peanut at Kingaroy
---
By Geraldine Brooks
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST </IN>
<DATELINE> BRISBANE, Australia  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Sir Johannes Bjelke-Petersen, the 76-year-old peanut farmer who wants to be Australia's next prime minister, offends bunches of voters at the drop of a hat. 

   He calls homosexuals "evil animals," mocks the "heathen beliefs" of aborigines and says the best thing that could happen to Australia is to "get rid of all the media" so that "no one will know anything." 

   During his 19 years as premier of the state of Queensland, he has kept sex education out of schools and backed oil drilling on the Great Barrier Reef. 
Aborigines once tried to sing him to death in an ancient ritual. 
Prime Minister Bob Hawke calls him "demented." 

   Yet since announcing his national campaign in late January, Sir Joh, as he likes to be called, has gathered considerable backing. 
The latest polls put his support as high as 27%. 
Political analysts say his simple messages -- low taxes, smaller government, law and order -- strike the same deep chords that President Reagan has so successfully touched in American voters. 

   In a predominantly secular and leisure-loving country, Sir Joh, the son of a Danish-born Lutheran pastor, is a fundamentalist Christian who adheres to the strictest of work ethics. 
"I don't take holidays," he says. 
"I don't believe in them." 

   The contrast with the present prime minister is striking: Mr. Hawke, also a minister's son, is an agnostic who doesn't make any secret of his hard-drinking and womanizing past. 
He is an Oxford-educated Rhodes Scholar who once headed the country's trade-union movement and now heads the Labor Party. 
Sir Joh, a member of the conservative National Party, is a teetotaler who left school at 13, shunned even such wholesome entertainments as country dances and became a millionaire by scratching farms out of scrub. 
His stated goal is to smash the unions. 

   "If a dog frightens you and bites people, you tie it up," he says. 
"The unions hurt and frighten people, and I'm going to tie them up." 
In 1985 he sacked about 1,000 striking Queensland electricity workers in one of the toughest stands ever taken against a union in Australia. 

   Sir Joh's strong views have made him plenty of enemies. 
Although political violence is almost unknown in Australia, he wore a bulletproof vest in one election campaign because of death threats. 
In 1975, a letter bomb injured two members of his staff. 

   Some of the animosity springs from frustration with the state's distorted electoral system. 
In Queensland, the value of rural votes far outweighs that of city votes. 
This enabled Sir Joh to win last November's state election with less than 40% of the vote. 
In the past, he has governed on as little as 19%. 

   His political adventures have at times brought more ridicule than abuse: 

   --In 1978, he defied a federal ban to bring to Queensland a therapist who claimed he could cure cancer. 
The therapist was jailed five years later in the U.S. for defrauding patients. 

   --Sir Joh gave government backing to an inventor who said he could build a hydrogen-powered car. 
A demonstration of the car ended in farce when nobody could produce the ignition keys. 
The inventor has since slipped from the public eye. 

   --When New Zealand banned nuclear ships from its ports, Sir Joh retaliated on behalf of the excluded U.S. Navy by refusing Queensland port facilities to a cargo of New Zealand chocolates. 

   Political opponents have called the Queensland premier mentally incompetent. 
Last year, the opposition presented the state Parliament with a report by a British psychologist and a linguistics expert. 
It found that Sir Joh's stumbling syntax put him "close to the bottom of the range for brain-damaged speakers." 

   It is, in fact, sometimes difficult to decipher the premier's meaning. 
Verbatim quotes occasionally are as garbled and hard to punctuate as the following: "The only ones who wish me to retire really, truly, honestly -- people -- in our party they're rock-solid, they have got no options in lots of ways, you know very well, but that's not necessary, the people who want me to retire are the socialists." 

   Sentences like that caused one political opponent to quip, "Joh is the only politician in Australia who doesn't need a scrambler on his phone." 

   There have been jokes, too, about Sir Joh's family's ambitions. 
In 1980 his wife, Florence, until then best known for her baking prowess, was elected to a federal senate seat, giving rise to what headline writers like to call the "Flo and Joh Show." 
Their son, John, a cattle farmer, also may step onto the federal stage. 
Sir Joh has been mulling the possibility of finding a parliamentary seat for him. 

   All this has caused Bill Hayden, Australia's foreign minister, to remark that Sir Joh should emulate the Roman emperor Caligula and "put his horse in the senate, too." 
But some analysts aren't laughing at Sir Joh. 
"He has to be taken extremely seriously," says Queensland historian Ross Fitzgerald. 
"He has tremendous financial backing." 

   A federal election isn't due until early next year, and it isn't clear exactly what strategy Sir Joh will pursue. 
If a National Party member of Parliament stands aside for him, he could win a federal seat in a by-election before the next national election and hope to be given the party leadership. 
If that doesn't work out, he hasn't ruled out starting his own party. 

   Mr. Fitzgerald argues that Australia's bleak economic outlook makes people receptive to Sir Joh's style of rhetoric. 
"Political debate may get pushed so far to the right," he says, "that previously bizarre notions suddenly become credible, as they did in Hitler's Germany." 

   Sir Joh's financial backers include real-estate developers such as Michael Gore, whose Sanctuary Cove tourist and residential complex is permitted, by a special act of the state Parliament, to disregard certain zoning and planning regulations, and Edward Kornhauser, whose Paradise Center high-rise development also benefited from a special state parliamentary act. 

   "As an investor it's very nice that the premier himself will speak with you," Mr. Kornhauser says. 
"In other states you get tied up in red tape." 

   Sir Joh and his ministers have been embroiled in controversies over their own business interests, but Sir Joh says "there's nothing in" allegations of corruption that have been leveled at him or his government. 
He has taken to using Australia's tough defamation laws to silence allegations; he says he filed 16 suits over stories that appeared before the last state election. 

   So far, Sir Joh has disclosed few details of the policies he will pursue if he wins a seat in the federal Parliament. 
He typically brushes aside questions on specifics. 
For example, at a campaign rally last month, Sir Joh said he supported Bruce Ruxton, the veterans' association leader who has criticized black and Asian immigration to Australia. 
Asked to elaborate on his policy regarding Asian immigration, Sir Joh responsed to this reporter: "You mind your own business. 
I'm not going to tell you everything I intend to do. 
Next thing you'll be asking me what color socks I'm wearing." 

   But the lack of detail doesn't trouble Sir Joh's supporters, many of whom come from the small towns and big farms that dot the vast outback of a state 2 1/2 times the size of Texas. 

   The premier's hometown is typical. 
The first hint that you are entering "Joh Country" is a roadside billboard demanding, "Are You a Christian?" 
The next is the giant peanut atop the sign proclaiming the town of Kingaroy. 
Sir Joh says he tries to get home to Kingaroy every Sunday. 
As a lay pastor, he sometimes delivers the sermon in the little Lutheran church nearby, while Lady Flo plays hymns on the organ. 

   "You'd never ever dream that quiet, nicely spoken young chap would have become the politician he is today," says Arnold Tessmann, taking a break from the evening milking to discuss the prospect of his neighbor's becoming prime minister. 
"I think he'd make a good prime minister, but I couldn't say for sure he'll get there. 
Australia might be different from Queensland." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
