ID: 254	RANK: 30	SCORE: 5.381583
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870421-0094 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
The Importance of Being O'Toole
---
By Robert Goldberg</HL>
<DD> 04/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   After just three minutes in Peter O'Toole's midtown hotel suite, I was sure I had wandered into a scene from "My Favorite Year." 
I hadn't even gotten off a single question when the Irish actor decided we must have lunch, and swept us off to the dining room downstairs. 
En route, he paused to gallantly kiss the hands of women, sing calypso ditties with the elevator man, and pound actor Denholm Elliott mightily on the arm. 
"Good man, good man," he exclaimed, then threw back his head to give a mighty laugh. 

   Here was the great O'Toole, a lion of an actor, looking a little wobbly in the best John Barrymore tradition, and just as impossibly charming as his screen presence. 
"I would kill for coffee," he proclaimed as we sat down. 
Gazing regally around the room, he planted a Gauloise in a long black cigarette holder and puffed away. 

   At 54, Peter O'Toole is a man so outsized, so larger-than-life, that for all his mannerisms, for all his affectations, you have to like him. 
And though he looks a good decade older -- in fact, he looks like death warmed over -- still, he has style. 

   Polished, witty, well-read, Mr. O'Toole is a great, rambling conversationalist, a raconteur who touches on Confucius and cricket, van Gogh and early Anglo-Saxon poetry. 
Then too, his voice is a wonderful instrument -- cultured and resonant, with just a hint of irony. 
Even when he orders his roast-beef sandwich, it sounds thrilling; Mr. O'Toole doesn't just talk, he offers his words like presents, gift-wrapped. 
"Superb," he says through clenched teeth, exploding the second syllable. 
"Ab-so-lute-ly su-perb." 

   With Peter O'Toole, everything is a story, including why he happens to be in New York, rehearsing for Sunday night's opening of George Bernard Shaw's "Pygmalion" at the Plymouth Theatre. 
"Well, actually," he says, "It was a complete shock. 
I was in China, acting in Bertolucci's new film {"The Last Emperor in China"}. 
I walked into a telex room in Peking to send off a message and my eye fell on a telex addressed to me. 
It was obviously the last of a series of messages addressed to me. 
I had never gotten any of them. 'Only two days left to make up your mind on the rights to "Pygmalion,"' it said. 
Two days? 
So I sent back 'Get it.' 
If I hadn't gone into that telex room . . ." . . . 
He wouldn't be about to open on Broadway. 

   For Mr. O'Toole, the chance to play in "Pygmalion" -- Shaw's 1913 play about a professor who tries to transform a flower girl into a duchess -- is a special treat: "I love Shaw. 
I love the musicality of the speech -- the disarming naturalness in the middle of dense argued rhetoric, the tomfooleries amongst the deathly chilling seriousnesses." 

   This stage appearance (as Professor Henry Higgins to Amanda Plummer's Eliza Doolittle) follows several recent screen roles ("Creator," "Club Paradise"). 
"I'm seldom away from the stage for very long," Mr. O'Toole says. 
"I love all of it, screen and stage, but you do need the audience. 
They tell you how you're doing -- how to go quicker, how to go slower, how to make them laugh, how to affect them. 
You need an audience to nourish you." 

   Strangely enough, this "Pygmalion" is Mr. O'Toole's Broadway debut. 
It's a new beginning of sorts for an actor whose credits number more than 30 screen roles and 60 stage appearances, whose career is a relief map of pinnacles and valleys. 

   Born in Connemara in the northwest of Ireland, Mr. O'Toole grew up an immigrant in England in the seedy industrial streets of Leeds, where his father was a race-track bookie. 
Young Peter was terrible at school, obsessed by sports -- swimming, running and especially rugby ("It was my dream to wear the green for Ireland"). 
He tried various odd jobs -- journalism, photography and a two-year stint in the navy -- before settling on acting. 
Legend has it that it was a performance by Sir Michael Redgrave as King Lear that made up his mind. 

   "This much is sure," says Mr. O'Toole with a smile. 
"I was bumming around with a friend and we blew our last shillings to see Michael -- and he was mighty. 
We had to spend that night in a haystack. 
At least, we though it was a haystack," he chuckles. 
"It turned out to be a dung heap." 

   At the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, he undertook the rigorous training in speech and movement alongside Alan Bates, Albert Finney and many other great actors of his generation. 
Upon graduation, he was one of 400 to try out for the classical repertory company at the Bristol Old Vic (the farm team for the Old Vic), and the only one to get a contract. 

   "To this day, I still don't believe it happened," he says. 
"There are many, many highs in a life, but there's nothing I cherish more than walking down the cobbled lane at the Theatre Royal Bristol for the first time, and entering the stage door, shaking like an aspen leaf." 

   Of course, there followed a series of stage and screen roles that are now well known: the first triumph in David Lean's sage "Lawrence of Arabia" (1962), the string of '60s and '70s successes in "Becket," "Lord Jim," "The Lion in Winter," "Goodbye Mr. Chips," "The Ruling Class," and "Man of La Mancha." 
Each year produced a new, improved O'Toole, more emotionally powerful, more wickedly funny. 

   But in the mid-1970s, as he turned 40, everything began to crumble around the actor -- he had to cope with a severe drinking problem, physical illnesses and operations, not to mention a divorce. 
In short, like Kean and Barrymore, he imploded. 
"The age of 40 comes along and says, 'Hello sweetheart, how much more of this can you take?'" 
Mr. O'Toole shrugs ruefully. 
"The 40s are a tough time for anybody. 
It's a time of great change. 
You either come to terms with your age or you don't. 
I just turned it inwards." 

   Scraping bottom, he decided to begin again: "I went back to Ireland, to Connemara. 
I built a house, I planted lots of trees, I laid sewer pipes. 
I did absolutely nothing for a year. 
Then I said, 'Right. 
What'll you do next?' 
And everything in me screamed, 'Go home.' 
So I went back to the Bristol Old Vic and signed on again in rep. 
It was important to touch home again. 
Surely you understand?" 

   The past 10 to 15 years have not been overly kind to Peter O'Toole. 
On the stage, the "Macbeth" he mounted in London was termed, by one English critic, "the worst Shakespearean disaster since the burning of the Globe." 
On the screen, he acted in his share of (as he puts it) "rubbish": "Rosebud," "Caligula" and "Creator." 
"Look," he says. 
"There's rent to be paid and food to be bought, so don't ask me any silly questions. 
It's very nice to be able to pick and choose . . . but there are fewer and fewer good scripts going around today." 

   And yet, just when Mr. O'Toole was being consigned to the oblivion of faded thespians, he bounced back. 
In two impressive films in the early 1980s -- "The Stunt Man" and "My Favorite Year" -- he reminded his critics just how skilled he is. 
The blend of comedy and raw irony was especially moving in "My Favorite Year," in which Mr. O'Toole played an actor battling the bottle and a self-destructive urge. 

   "After I build something," the actor once said, back in the 1960s, "I knock it down -- just for the hell of it." 
Most actors get one good career if they're lucky. 
Mr. O'Toole has built and knocked down several. 
And yet, he seems to be building again, reconstructing the great O'Toole. 

   Unlike Sir Laurence Olivier or Sir John Gielgud, master craftsmen, flawless and precise, Mr. O'Toole is an epic actor, an actor who, from "Lawrence of Arabia" on, has always succeeded with outrageous panache and failed with huge, sloppy gestures. 

   Just look at him now, sitting in the corner booth with his green corduroy suit and his pink-and-green tie. 
Just look at the long black cigarette holder. 
Just listen to the way he talks about van Gogh (and his "great silly sunflower"), or sunrise on the Gobi Desert, or theater history ("Sir John" this and "Sir Kenneth" that). 
You simply have to like the guy. 
I'd like to see him do Lear. 
The mad king -- immensely powerful yet so self-destructive, so self-indulgent you want to shake him by the shoulders and say "Look, you've got this whole great kingdom here, don't be a fool, don't throw it away." 

   ---
   Mr. Goldberg is a New York-based free-lance writer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
