ID: 254	RANK: 33	SCORE: 5.329829
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870701-0180 </DOCNO>
<HL> Europe:
Italy's Challenges in Wake of the Elections
---
By Antonio Martino</HL>
<DD> 07/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP </IN>
<DATELINE> ROME  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Italy's latest general elections suggest a few comments. 
More than any of the previous 10 in the past 41 years, these results pose a formidable challenge to believers in proportional representation. 
Given the multitude of parties represented, the elections do not answer the question of who should rule the country. 
The choice of the ruling coalition is made by party leaders, not the electorate. 

   More than a dozen "parties" have succeeded in getting their representatives elected. 
It's true that the three major political parties polled more than 75% of the popular vote, so that the disintegration of the Parliament concerns only a minority of the seats. 
But it is equally true that several government coalitions are theoretically possible, so that the choice of the ruling coalition will be made by the usual interparty negotiations. 
And, as for the results in terms of stability, it is doubtful the current Parliament will prove to be much more stable than the previous ones. 

   In a sense the electorate seems to have understood the problem. 
Having realized that the choice of the government is not for it to make, some people have decided to use their vote for other purposes -- voice their protest or express their wishes in general, without specific reference to the problem of who should rule the country. 

   This helps explain the election of a substantial number of "greens," several representatives of local movements advocating "autonomy" for their regions, a couple of folk singers, a comedian and a known porno star. 
Well-known and widely respected parliamentarians have not been reelected, making room for newcomers -- some of whom are rather eccentric, to say the least. 
The problem is obviously not new, witness Emperor Caligula's unsuccessful attempt to improve the quality of the Senate by nominating his horse. 

   An important political message of the election was the defeat of the Italian Communist Party, known as the PCI. 
By the standards of its electoral systems and of other political parties, it was not a gigantic loss. 
But it is something close to a catastrophe in a country where electoral outcomes are slow to change and for a party that's not used to losing votes. 
PCI lost 21 deputies and seven senators. 
Contradicting its traditional claim to be a party of the young, of the future, it lost more votes in the Chamber of Deputies, where 18 is the minimum voting age, than in the Senate, where electors have to be 21. 

   PCI received fewer votes than at any time since 1963, and the myth of its invincibility received another, possibly decisive, blow. 
Even worse was the fact that electoral results proved that PCI has no strategy whatsoever. 
Its only hopes are the mistakes of other parties. 
The possibility of a "united left" coalition, which PCI had presented as an alternative to the government, is less credible after the elections than it was before. 
The left is substantially weaker and more divided, and former Socialist Premier Bettino Craxi's goal of claiming leadership of the entire left for the Socialists seems much less utopian. 
The fate of PCI seems similar to that of declining communist parties elsewhere. 

   Another message is the increase in total votes jointly received by the five parties constituting the previous government coalition, which now can count on a larger majority in both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. 
Within the coalition, the two major parties -- the Christian Democrats and the Socialists -- gained. 
This should strengthen their current leaderships. 
It is to be hoped the two leaders will abandon their personal rivalries, so the coalition can be put together again, and a new period of political stability guaranteed. 

   Political stability may be desirable or undesirable, depending on what the existing government is in fact doing. 
In totalitarian countries, for example, most of us would regard stability as a liability rather than an asset. 
So the question becomes, assuming that a stable coalition government is formed, what can Italians hope for in terms of actual policy? 
The tentative answer to such a question is unfortunately not encouraging. 
The single most important issue in Italy is the excessive size of government -- the high ratio of public spending, taxation and borrowing to national income. 
From this point of view, despite a substantial body of promises to the contrary, it is highly unlikely that the country will obtain the kind of radical reform it needs from the democratic political process alone. 

   Such pessimism is motivated by the reactions that have followed the recent revision of the national income statistics. 
The upward revision of gross domestic product (GDP) figures has made many people jump to the conclusion that public spending and taxation are not excessive, since their ratio to GDP has been reduced by the manipulation of national income statistics. 
If you can't reduce spending, but you still want to reduce the ratio of spending to GDP, all you have to do is increase the GDP figure. 
Very simple, really. 
Had this bizarre view been voiced by the usual uninformed journalists or by interested politicians, there would be no reason to worry. 
The trouble is that no less an authority than Carlo A. Ciampi, the governor of Banca d'Italia, has deemed it wise to lend credibility to such a notion. 
Mr. Ciampi's point of view is that the revision of income figures "shows" the extent of tax evasion and avoidance, and that, therefore, the reduction of the deficit must be achieved by increasing taxation. 

   Mr. Ciampi's point of view is, of course, unacceptable. 
First, it's not clear why the statistical manipulations should "prove" anything about the size of tax avoidance and evasion. 
Second, even if they did, the solution to the problem of tax evasion should be that of improving the enforcement of tax laws, not that of making everybody pay more taxes. 
Third, Mr. Ciampi should know very well that an increase in revenue does not guarantee a reduction in the deficit. 

   In fact, in the past 12 years revenue has always increased, and, with only two exceptions, spending has increased more than revenue, so that the increase in taxation has resulted in an increase, rather than a decrease, in the deficit. 
As for the two years in which spending has increased less than revenue (1976 and 1986), only 2% to 3% of the increased revenue was in fact used to reduce the deficit. 
Clearly, increasing taxation by $1 million in order to achieve a $20,000 reduction in the deficit does not seem a very efficient way to tackle the problem. 
Finally, it seems contradictory, to say the least, to worry about the size of unemployment -- and simultaneously advocate an increase in taxation. 

   No matter how unfounded Mr. Ciampi's view, however, it will provide the next government with a welcome excuse for not doing what it should do: cut spending, reduce taxation and seriously tackle the problem of the deficit. 
It is not entirely irrational to suppose that, encouraged by the peculiar logic of Mr. Ciampi and by the nationalistic euphoria over the new GDP figures, the next government will attempt to pursue the course of increasing taxation, of making revenue chase spending in the vain attempt to reduce the deficit. 
Should this happen, it is probable that further episodes of tax rebellion will have to remind the political world that even the patience of Italian taxpayers is limited. 

   ---
   Mr. Martino is professor of monetary history and policy at the University of Rome. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
