ID: 254	RANK: 38	SCORE: 5.026095
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870316-0176 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Business Bookshelf:
A Corporate Raider's Rx for Big Business
---
By Tim Metz</HL>
<DD> 03/16/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Is T. Boone Pickens Jr. getting ready for another mega-deal? 

   Some of his closest observers on Wall Street think so, and Mr. Pickens's new autobiography, "Boone" (Houghton Mifflin, 293 pages, $18.95), does nothing to dissuade anyone from that view. 
In the epilogue of the book, Mr. Pickens quotes a Wall Street analyst answering a Journal reporter's question about what Mr. Pickens might do with the cash and borrowing power (currently about $1.25 billion) of Mesa Limited Partnership, which Mr. Pickens runs: "What do you think Boone will do with that much money?" the analyst counters, rhetorically. 

   "He {implied} we were going to do something," Mr. Pickens writes. 
"But that something might be different. 
I have always believed that it's important to show a new look periodically. 
Predictability can lead to failure." 
Especially in book publishing. 

   Predictability is exactly what's wrong with this otherwise craftsmanlike little book, in which Mr. Pickens collaborated with writer Jim Conaway. 
Too often, "Boone" is an annotated amalgam of Mr. Pickens's press clippings, rather than an insightful self-portrait of the capricious crusader of the oil patch, whom corporate managements have come to fear and loathe. 

   But at least there is no truth-in-packaging problem here. 
"Boone" is what the cover offers, and Boone, Boone, Boone is what the reader gets. 
Thus: 

   Boone grows up in Holdenville, Okla., and Amarillo, Texas. 

   Boone goes to work for Phillips Petroleum Co. but gets frustrated by the waste and bureaucracy there and so leaves to establish what was to grow into Mesa Petroleum Co. 

   Boone realizes in the late 1970s that it's too costly and uncertain to replace Mesa's oil and gas reserves by exploration and so starts hunting for oil on Wall Street. 

   Boone terrorizes and topples Cities Service Co. and Gulf Corp., settles with Phillips, backs away from a confrontation with Superior Oil Corp. and is stopped cold by Unocal Corp. (but the Mesa group uses a tax loophole to reap a $90 million profit in defeat). 

   Boone drops $15,000 on a Super Bowl bet and $3 million in the commodities market while he's off playing in a three-day Canadian golf tournament. (Weep not, Boone fans. 
He's got $105 million left.) 

   Occasionally -- all too rarely in fact -- Mr. Pickens pauses for a little reflection. 
His message is that there are a few things seriously wrong with big business, but they can be put right fairly easily. 

   What's wrong, in Mr. Pickens's view, is that most of the people who manage America's major public companies don't hold enough stock in them to think like shareholders. 
Instead, he contends, they build elaborate, wasteful bureaucracies; eschew, rather than manage, risk; treat themselves to Caligulan life styles at shareholders' expense; and try to hold on to their perks and power by naysaying and using brute economic force against right thinkers such as Mr. Pickens. 

   Mr. Pickens backs his critique with some truly delicious examples of management hubris, cowardice and waste. 
They include oil-exploration kickbacks, $30,000 hunting trips to Spain in a corporate jet, and costly completions of oil wells known to be faulty just so a discovery can be logged. 

   To this reporter, after a couple of decades of observing corporate managements, the book's diagnosis of the disease infecting a good part of industrial America rings true. 
But Mr. Pickens's prescription for the ailment doesn't. 

   His solution, dramatically underscored in his past takeover moves, is to end waste of assets by wresting them away from incompetent or unresponsive managements and turning them back to the shareholders -- through royalty trusts, share repurchases or takeovers. 

   In the end, no matter which way Mr. Pickens slices it, that's liquidation. 
And liquidation is both shortsighted and doubly unjust. 
It's shortsighted because it summarily eliminates the potential long-term shareholder, and, by dismembering corporations, it reduces corporate philanthropy, which is one of the social benefits of large corporations. 
It's unjust because it may reward rather than punish the bad manager, who may simply unfurl his golden parachute and go his merry way; and because it often snatches jobs away from those rank-and-file employees who already are among the principal victims of mismanagement. 

   One wonders why a somewhat-less-radical solution than corporate dismemberment mightn't be a wise alternative to Mr. Pickens's proposals. 
If shareholders can band together to force a sale or restructuring, why couldn't they band together to force managers to take most of their compensation in stock, rather than salary and perks? 

   Ah, but there's no fast money for shareholders in that; no chance for Mr. Pickens to do well while he does good. 

   ---
   Mr. Metz is a news editor for the Journal in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
