ID: 254	RANK: 47	SCORE: 4.557737
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880210-0067 </DOCNO>
<HL> Women Allege Sexist Atmosphere In Offices Constitutes Harassment </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joseph Pereira (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR ECL </CO>
<TEXT>
   A group of men in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.'s Boston office pastes nude photographs from Playboy magazine onto biographies of new women employees that the company includes in newsletters. 

   A ChemLawn Corp. executive allegedly spices up a company slide show with a photo of a naked woman and suggestive comments. 

   Administrators at St. Louis University Medical Center show the X-rated movie "Deep Throat" at a meeting after telling a businesswoman that they would show an "educational film." 

   Blatant, good-old-boy sexism still thrives in the corporate workplace. 
In some offices, it's sophomoric risque jokes or pornographic slides in video presentations; at others it's pinup posters or lewd pranks. 
But whatever form it takes, many women feel that the office atmosphere created by such behavior constitutes sexual harassment -- and some of them are going to court to stop it. 

   "Instead of a single individual (being charged with harassment), I'm seeing more cases in which the whole environment is a source of sexual harassment," says K. C. Wagner, a pyschological counselor who is scheduled to testify as an expert witness in three cases that involve sexist environments. 

   Adds Beville May, a lawyer representing a Securities and Exchange Commission worker who charged that a sexist atmosphere in her office amounted to harassment: "It's psychological warfare with an old-boy network. 
Where does a person turn for relief?" 

   Corporate officials, meanwhile, condemn such practices, but often argue that they don't amount to harassment. 

   So far, the courts have been murky on the issue. 
"Decisions often have depended on the quirks of one court or judge vs. another," says Kathleen Neville, vice president of Women's Action for Good Employment Standards, a national women's rights organization that tracks cases. 
"But as more of these cases get into court and employers start discussing them, a clearer picture will emerge." 

   Among the pending suits is one filed in December by Kristine Utley, a sales associate for Goldman Sachs, in state Superior Court in Boston. 
Ms. Utley was fired in November after refusing a transfer to New York; her suit claims the transfer was discriminatory because a man in a similar job wasn't asked to move to New York. 

   Separately, her complaint charges Goldman Sachs with sexual harassment over the behavior of some employees in the Boston office. 
The suit alleges that some male employees cut out photographs of bare-breasted women from magazines and put them on copies of company newsletters, next to brief biographies of new women employees, as if they were photos of the new workers; the newsletters were then passed around the office. 
The suit also says the men circulated sexist literature, like "The Smart Man's Creed, or Why Beer is Better than Women." 
One line: "After you've had a beer, the bottle is still worth a dime." 
Ms. Utley wants her job back, unspecified damages and an end to the alleged harassment. 

   A Goldman Sachs spokesman says an inquiry by the firm found that four men in the office were responsible. 
"They were severely disciplined, and one has since left the firm," he says. 
But in a brief, the firm denies that the pictures and disparaging literature created a hostile, intimidating and sexist work environment. 
The firm also contends that it didn't discriminate against Ms. Utley in firing her. 

   In a suit awaiting trial in federal district court in Rochester, N.Y., Joanne Barbetta alleges that male co-workers at ChemLawn reveled in a climate of pornography and vulgarities. 
Ms. Barbetta says the atmosphere forced her to quit her job as a clerk. 
Her suit, filed in May 1986, seeks unspecified damages. 

   In her complaint, she says men in the office circulated pinup calendars and pornographic magazines. 
She also says a ChemLawn executive included suggestive slides in a presentation. 
One showed a nude model, the complaint says, and about another slide, of a woman in a tight-fitting dress, the executive commented: "She's a real asset to the company." 
Management explained the slides as a way to "keep the guys awake," the complaint says. 

   Ms. Barbetta also claims that a male co-worker habitually grabbed her breasts. 
"The whole atmosphere was poisoning my system," she says. 
"I would go home and cry every night." 

   But Eugene Ulterino, a lawyer representing the company, says, "Whether or not she quit as a result of stress on the job will have to be argued in court." 

   In a filing, ChemLawn, now a unit of EcoLab Inc. of St. Paul, Minn., says, "When viewed in their totality, these isolated remarks and events over the course of two years fall far short" of the legal standard for sexual harassment. 
The filing adds that the law "does not create a claim of sexual harassment for each and every crude joke or sexually explicit remark, even when uttered by a supervisor." 

   Also awaiting trial, in federal district court in Washington, D.C., is the harassment and discrimination suit of Marie Regab against Air France, a case that has prompted some women's groups to picket several Air France terminals in the U.S. 
The suit, seeking reinstatement, $1.5 million in damages and an end to harassment, was filed in October 1986, shortly after Ms. Regab was fired from her job as a saleswoman for the airline in Washington. 

   The reason she was given for her dismissal: "recalcitrance and intransigence," according to the complaint. 
Ms. Regab, an Air France employee for 18 years, contends she was fired "only after she started asking for equal pay," says James Forrest King, her attorney. 

   In her complaint, Ms. Regab alleges that her office was a sex-oriented environment in which one of her superiors asked her to sleep with another while the other repeatedly took her to lunch and dinner to discuss his sex life. 
Mr. King says he intends to portray the office as having the atmosphere of a men's "locker room, with men carrying around Penthouse and Playboy magazines and openly talking about their sexual exploits." 
Ms. Regab says the workplace atmosphere constituted harassment because "it was sickening and an insult to the women in the office." 
She says she put up with "the sexual nonsense for the sake of keeping my job." 
Air France denies the suit's charges. 

   The few similar previous cases have produced mixed results. 
Last year a jury in state court in St. Louis rejected a $4 million suit by Olivia Young, a medical-services saleswoman, over being shown the movie "Deep Throat" in the presence of business associates. 

   Ms. Young was shown the movie at St. Louis University Hospital, with which her firm did business, by a group of male hospital administrators at the end of a meeting. 
She claimed that watching the film caused acute emotional distress that led to a divorce and the loss of her job, says Frank Susman, her trial attorney. 

   Last May, a federal district court in Michigan dismissed a claim by Vivienne Rabidue, a secretary for Osceola Refining Co., that foul language and sexual posters poisoned her work environment. 
The court said the claim didn't stand up "when considered in the context of a society that condones and publicly features and commercially exploits open displays of written and pictorial erotica." 

   But in one pending case, a preliminary ruling has gone in favor of the plaintiff. 
Michael A. Telesca, the judge hearing Ms. Barbetta's complaint against ChemLawn, last year rejected a company motion to dismiss the suit and ordered the case to trial. 
He ruled that the sexual material "may be found to create an atmosphere in which women are viewed as men's sexual playthings rather than as their equal co-workers." 
That atmosphere, he added, can affect the "psychological well-being of the reasonable woman and interfere with her ability to perform her job." 

   Women's groups say companies should do a better job of policing themselves. 
But employers say it isn't always easy to define what does and doesn't constitute an environment of sexual harassment. 
"It's such an individualized thing," says George Palmer, a spokesman for Du Pont Co. "Harassment can be different things to different people." 
He adds that to be safe, "we tell people: It's harassment when something starts bothering somebody." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
