ID: 254	RANK: 61	SCORE: 3.959172
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870403-0057 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Lawyer in Battle of the TV Ministers
Says He Sometimes Has to Cast a Stone
---
By Ed Bean
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN>
<DATELINE> WORCESTER, Mass.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   When Penthouse magazine beat Jerry Falwell in court, the evangelist did the sensible thing. 
He hired the Penthouse lawyer. 

   "Don't confuse the lawyer and the client," cautions Norman Roy Grutman, who counts among his clients Mr. Falwell, Penthouse -- and most recently the PTL Club. 

   When Mr. Falwell recently took the reins of the PTL broadcast ministry, he first prayed. 
Then he called again on Mr. Grutman. 

   While Mr. Falwell has played holy statesman in the battle of television pulpits, Mr. Grutman has played holy warrior. 
The New York City lawyer touched off a furor last week by suggesting that Jim Bakker's ouster as head of PTL was the result of a takeover plot by a rival TV evangelist. 

   For the moment, he is holding his verbal fire, at the request of PTL. 
But as the conflicts between TV evangelists continue, look for Mr. Grutman to continue to generate controversy and to put Mr. Bakker's accusers on the defensive. 

   The Rev. Jimmy Swaggart, who claimed that Mr. Grutman was referring to him, retaliated to Mr. Grutman's first salvo by labeling the 56-year-old barrister a "porno lawyer." 

   This week, Mr. Grutman is a church lawyer, representing Bible Speaks, a fundamentalist group that is being sued in federal bankruptcy court here by 34-year-old Elizabeth Dayton Dovydenas. 
She is the daughter of Wallace Dayton, one of the founders of the Dayton Hudson department-store empire. 
Mrs. Dovydenas and her family claim she was coerced into giving the church $6.1 million and they want it back. 
The church says she gave the money of her own free will and changed her mind only after she was pressured by her family. 

   When a psychologist, testifying for Mrs. Dovydenas, calls Bible Speaks a cult, Mr. Grutman closes in. 
How did the psychologist gain his expertise in cults? 
A seminar and books, he is told. 
What books? thunders barrel-chested Mr. Grutman, whose voice resonates throughout the courtroom with little effort. 
The psychologist can't remember. 
Mr. Grutman contemptuously turns his back on him. 
Later his cross-examination will include lectures on St. Paul and a question about a hypothetical craps game across the hall in the clerk's office. 

   In court, Mr. Grutman -- who has degrees from Columbia Law School and Yale University -- doesn't favor turning the other cheek. 
"A lunge for the jugular will more likely promote a favorable disposition . . . , " Mr. Grutman and a law partner wrote in a 1984 National Law Journal article. 
He likes pugilist imagery: There are rules but "the object is to knock the other guy out." 
But you don't do that by being "boring as sawdust," he adds. 

   His past theatrics have included walking out of a courtroom in disgust over a judge's ruling and once calling Hustler magazine publisher Larry Flynt the "Son of Sam" of publishers. 

   Mr. Grutman sued Hustler and Mr. Flynt on behalf of Penthouse publisher Robert Guccione's girlfriend, who complained that a Hustler article about her and Mr. Guccione was libelous. 

   In his 17 years as counsel for Penthouse, he also has defended the magazine against plaintiffs such as former Miss America Vanessa Williams, as well as a former Miss Wyoming and Mr. Falwell. 
The preacher tried to block publication of an interview given to a free-lance writer, who hadn't revealed he was working for Penthouse. 

   Mr. Grutman subsequently represented Mr. Falwell in a complaint against Hustler, in the process finding a new way to win a libel action. 
The court ruled that the magazine didn't libel Mr. Falwell in a liquor ad parody that suggested he was a drunkard, but it nonetheless awarded him $200,000 for "emotional distress." 
Earlier this week, however, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review that judgment. 

   Mr. Grutman's personal life style falls more toward the Falwell end of the spectrum than the Guccione one -- though the publisher is a friend of long standing. 
The lawyer says he doesn't smoke, drink, go to nightclubs, watch much television or "chase after women." 
He'll say little about his personal religious beliefs, except to say that he is a Christian Scientist. 

   Mr. Grutman says he likes cases that involve constitutional and societal issues, and also favors "cases that involve substantial amounts of money. 
This isn't a hobby." 

   As counsel for PTL, Mr. Grutman has hooked an issue, where, he says, the key parts of the equation are money and religion. 
When Mr. Falwell brought Mr. Grutman into the PTL scandal, the lawyer quickly put the other side on the defensive. 
He said he had information about Mr. Swaggart that would paint him "blacker in the same particulars in which I think he's trying to daub Jim Bakker." 

   For this week, at least, he isn't talking about Mr. Swaggart because, he says, the PTL told him to "put out the fire" caused by Mr. Bakker's resignation over allegations of an extramarital sexual encounter. 

   Explains Mr. Grutman, "I'm under instructions to be uncharacteristically passive, benign and non-incendiary." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
