ID: 254	RANK: 70	SCORE: 3.729021
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880602-0125 </DOCNO>
<HL> Banks Hit by Borrowers' Liability Suits --- Lending Cutoffs Prompt Charges Of Bad Faith </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jeff Bailey (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> DFED </CO>
<IN> BNK FIN </IN>
<TEXT>
   This account of a power lunch at Washington's Tiberios restaurant will ring painfully true to borrowers who feel powerless in their dealings with arrogant bankers. 

   At the lunch were William L. Walde, chairman of Dominion Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association, and Robert Geiger, an adviser to Penthouse magazine Publisher Robert Guccione. 
Mr. Geiger wanted to know why Dominion was dragging its feet on a big loan for Penthouse's planned Atlantic City casino. 
Dominion, he complained that day in February 1984, wasn't acting in good faith. 

   As Mr. Geiger recalls it, Mr. Walde shot back: "Screw good faith. 
We're going to do it our way." 

   Their way killed the casino project, Penthouse later charged in a lawsuit in New York federal court. 
And while Dominion and Mr. Walde dispute the entire account of the luncheon incident, as detailed in Mr. Geiger's testimony, the judge hearing the case accepted it, citing the conversation in his opinion. 
Appalled by Dominion's behavior, the judge awarded Penthouse a $129 million judgment, which the thrift has appealed. 

   The award is the biggest yet in a relatively new and rapidly growing area of law known as lender liability. 
Until recently, banks dismissed such suits by borrowers as desperate legal ploys. 
But some recent stunning defeats in these cases now have bankers and their lawyers reeling. 

   Disgruntled borrowers ranging from farmers to a grocery wholesaler to an oil-refinery investor have won multimillion-dollar judgments against banks, both from juries and judges. 
As with the Penthouse case, most of the big awards are on appeal, and so far there is little in the way of higher-court rulings to guide trial courts. 

   The cases take various forms, but the issue mostly comes down to a charge of bad faith: Bankers said or implied they would do one thing, then did something else that hurt the borrower's business. 
The bankers' defense hasn't been made any easier by the sort of behavior Mr. Walde was accused of. 

   "Lenders for years have gotten away with an awful lot of outrageous conduct," says Helen Chaitman, a New Jersey lawyer who heads an American Bar Association panel on lender liability. 
Ms. Chaitman's advice to the banks: Settle fast, and never let your case get before a jury. 
Lawyers say juries tend to dislike banks and other large institutions. 

   Lender liability isn't based on any new wrinkle in the law, so why the onslaught now? 
For one thing, the number of borrowers in financial trouble has jumped in recent years, as shown in banks' problem-loan totals. 
Suing a lender "is a way of making gold out of manure if your business collapses," complains one bank lawyer. 
And banks, often under pressure from federal regulators, have become more aggressive about collecting. 
Finally, lawyers see the trend as a natural extension of the boom in liability suits against doctors, insurers and other businesses. 

   To borrowers and their lawyers, the explosion of lender liability suits is long overdue. 
Joseph Ferraro, who represented Penthouse in the Dominion case, says: "Welcome to the 20th century. 
Lenders are being held to their contract obligations -- just the way everybody else has for 200 years in this country." 

   To bankers and their counsel, it ranks just short of the end of Western civilization. 
"It's a threat to the safety and soundness of banking," says Stephen M. Shapiro, a lawyer at Mayer, Brown &amp; Platt in Chicago representing a bank in a lender liability appeal. 
Mr. Shapiro worries that the risk of these suits "is going to chill the extension of credit" in the U.S. 

   Lender liability can go right to the bottom line because there is no insurance against it. 
So, banks are changing how they operate. 
They are asking borrowers up front to waive a jury trial in case of a liability dispute. 
They are taking pains to create paper trails in loan files to bolster cases that go to court. 
They are writing simpler loan agreements that juries can fathom. 
And they are thinking twice before abruptly telling customers to pay up. 

   The cases are humbling some powerful banking lawyers as well. 
"It's devastating," says one lawyer who lost a multimillion-dollar verdict for his biggest client, a major bank, and feared he'd never work for the bank again. 

   Even more frightening to lawyers than simply losing a case was the decision in the Penthouse suit. 
U.S. District Court Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy in New York stunned just about everyone in the case by also finding the Washington law firm that represented Dominion in the loan negotiations, Melrod, Redman &amp; Gartlan, jointly liable for the $129 million award. 
That decision, which Penthouse hadn't even asked for, gives it the right to collect from both parties, neither of which has enough assets to satisfy the verdict; like Dominion, the law firm is appealing. 
Clearly angry, the judge called a Melrod lawyer "Dominion's hatchet man," and accused the lawyer of lying under oath. 

   Of course, banks aren't losing all the cases. 
In a California appeals court, Bank of America recently won reversal of a $26 million judgment to a group of apple growers. 
And Wells Fargo &amp; Co. prevailed earlier this year in a case brought in California superior court by a cattle rancher who had fallen behind on his payments. 
In both cases, the borrowers claimed the banks improperly cut off their financing, but the courts found there were no agreements requiring the banks to continue lending. 
Wells Fargo even got the trial judge to order the rancher to pay the bank's legal fees. 

   But bankers are nevertheless alarmed at the cases they have lost. The suits come in a few basic forms:
   --You said you'd lend me the money but you didn't. 
Penthouse's award was an example of this, as was the second-largest judgment ever, a $105 million award won by Key Biscayne developer Fritz Scharenberg against Continental Illinois National Bank &amp; Trust Co. of Chicago. 
Both borrowers said they couldn't get loans elsewhere and had to abandon their projects. 

   --You never should have lent me money in the first place. 
This argument has been used by farmers who ended up hopelessly in debt, including two octogenarian sisters named Stanghellini in Sutter County, Calif. 
In state superior court, the sisters said their family farm operated for decades without borrowing, until Bank of America recommended an ill-fated expansion financed by loans. 
They won a $50 million judgment, which the bank has appealed. 

   --You lent me money and then meddled in my business. 
A group of lenders lost an $18.6 million verdict in a lawsuit brought by Farah Manufacturing Co., a Texas clothing concern, in state court there. 
The company accused the lenders of improperly threatening to withdraw financing if it changed management. 
The verdict was upheld by a Texas appeals court. 

   --You demanded your money back too soon or too fast. 
K.M.C. Inc., a Tennessee grocery wholesaler, won a $7.5 million judgment against Irving Trust Co. in federal court in that state and was upheld on appeal. 
K.M.C. collapsed after the New York bank suddenly reduced its lending. 

   In some cases, bankers say their behavior was not only proper, but spelled out and agreed to in loan contracts that the borrower signed. 
In the K.M.C. case, for instance, Irving Trust had a "demand note," entitling it to demand repayment of its loan at any time. 
The bank said it did so because K.M.C.'s finances were in disarray. 
But the borrower showed that Irving could have protected itself without acting in such haste. 

   Still, banks complain that juries too often disregard loan agreements and instead look for a good guy and a bad guy. 
"These notions of good faith and bad faith have begun to override paperwork. 
That's horrendous," says A. Bruce Schimberg, a lawyer at the Chicago law firm of Sidley &amp; Austin, which handles lender liability cases for several big banks but hasn't taken one to trial. 
Mr. Schimberg concedes, however, that in all the big cases banks have lost, some banker behavior appeared shoddy to the jury or judge. 
"The key cases all have been fraud and deception," he says. 
"Every single one has buried in it a surpriseat least alleged." 

   The Penthouse case featured the sort of surprise that gives a bank lawyer nightmares. 
The following account is based on interviews, Judge Duffy's opinion and appeal briefs filed by Penthouse, Dominion and the Melrod law firm. 

   By 1983, Mr. Guccione had spent $60 million on his casino project but still lacked financing to build. 
Dominion agreed to supply $35 million of the needed $97 million, even though the McLean, Va., thrift's legal lending limit was only $18.5 million. 
When Dominion began to have trouble finding other lenders to take the remainder of its commitment, Judge Duffy found, it secretly devised a strategy of delay to get out of the loan. 

   Penthouse was hit with many requests for additional information, and it suggested at the February 1984 lunch that Dominion wasn't playing fair. 
Even after Mr. Walde's blunt response, Penthouse kept dealing with Dominion. 

   Dominion denies Mr. Walde ever made the remark. 
And the thrift and law firm assert that Penthouse hadn't satisfied several key requirements of the loan agreement. 
To proceed, Dominion says, would have exposed it to enormous risks. 

   At about the time of the lunch, Dominion brought a new lawyer into the deal, Philip A. Gorelick of the Melrod firm. 
"Dominion hired Gorelick to bully and intimidate (Penthouse) into delaying the loan" until Dominion could find a buyer for part of it or until the commitment expired and Dominion could get out altogether, Judge Duffy wrote in his opinion. 

   Weeks later, "Penthouse finally realized that Dominion was intentionally destroying the deal," sought other financing, failed, and had to abandon the project, the judge said. 
Most of the award is based on an estimate of profits -- disputed by Dominion -- that Penthouse would have made at the casino over 10 years. 

   Dominion's best hope on appeal, lawyers suggest, may be to argue that Judge Duffy let his disgust with Mr. Gorelick affect his ruling. 
In a footnote to his ruling, the judge wrote: "Gorelick took the stand and attempted brazenly to lie to the court. 
During cross-examination, the crucible of truth, Gorelick continuously shifted uneasily in the chair, sweating like a trapped liar, and the glaze that came over his shifty eyes gave proof to his continuing perjury." 

   In its appeal, the Melrod firm says that Mr. Gorelick did sweat and hesitate on the stand -- but only after Judge Duffy had already branded him a liar. 
Mr. Gorelick, the firm says, was worried that he would lose his license to practice law or, worse, go to prison for perjury. 

   During a break in Mr. Gorelick's testimony, the judge summoned Melrod's trial lawyer to his robing room and implied that Mr. Gorelick was lying, according to a brief filed by Melrod in its appeal. 
"You have got it wrong," the trial lawyer, Robert L. Tofel, replied, according to the brief. 
"He is obnoxious, aggressive . . . but he is not a liar." 
Mr. Gorelick declined to comment pending the outcome of the appeal. 
Judge Duffy wouldn't comment. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
