ID: 254	RANK: 90	SCORE: 3.509441
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870730-0097 </DOCNO>
<HL> Report on Porn Turns Publishers Into Censors
---
By Michael J. McManus</HL>
<DD> 07/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PUBLISHING (PUB)
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The same week Lt. Col. Oliver North completed his testimony, Pocket Books published it in a 753-page paperback and put 775,000 on newsstands. 
Why the haste and why so many? 
The subject is of wide public interest, and since the text came from public testimony, it is in the public domain, which means no royalties have to be paid. 
Profits should be hefty. 
Bantam had a great success earlier this year when it published 702,000 copies of the Tower Commission Report within days after the report was released. 

   Indeed, most major federal investigations have produced similar instant books -- the Kerner Commission Report on urban riots in the 1960s, the Warren Commission Report on President Kennedy's assassination, the report on the Challenger disaster, etc. 

   There's one notable exception, however: the "Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography," which was released last July. 
Every major publisher in New York and three Christian publishers turned it down. 
And when a tiny Nashville firm printed it on a gamble, most bookstores refused to carry it. 

   Like the other federal investigations, the commission on pornography was about a controversial subject of wide public interest and the report was in the public domain. 
The Government Printing Office version was typed (not typeset) and took up 1,960 pages; it contained no summary and sold for $35. 
Surely a one-volume version at a popular price could be profitable. 
Since I had been covering the commission for the two syndicated columns I write and believed there was intense public interest in the commission's findings, I decided to see if I could get it published. 

   An editor at Simon &amp; Schuster, which publishes Pocket Books, told my agent that if I could pre-sell 100,000 copies, it would publish an "instant" book. 
At first, that seemed impossible. 
But I called up antiporn groups, church groups, pro-family organizations and got verbal commitments to buy 60,000 copies. 
And Zondervan told me that if it could be listed as co-publisher, it would buy the other 40,000 copies. 

   When I called the editor back and left word that I had pre-sold 100,000 books, he refused to take my calls. 
An aide offered to publish it in six to nine months. 
But my commitments were for a timely book. (Christian publishing houses such as Thomas Nelson had a different reason to say no: too many dirty words.) 

   I finally found a small Nashville firm to do a $9.95, 624-page version: Rutledge Hill Press, whose previous best seller had been "The Original Tennessee Homecoming Cookbook." 
I wrote a 40-page introduction that summarizes and analyzes the report. 

   After publication, the book faced a second round of censorship. 
Eight of the nation's 10 largest bookstore chains refused to buy it. 
Others got token numbers. 
Waldenbooks bought only 250 copies for its 1,000 stores -- one per four stores. 

   Despite its absence in major bookstores and despite Rutledge Hill Press's lack of advertising, some 68,000 copies were sold. 
Word Inc., a Christian publisher and distributor, sold about 14,000 to scattered stores. 
I sold 54,000 to those who had pledged to buy 60,000. 
In other words, with a few phone calls from my office, I sold five times as many copies as all of the nation's bookstores put together. 

   Why did publishers and bookstores want to steer clear of the report? 
The answer is media bias on the issue of pornography. 

   I first encountered press bias on pornography when I was covering the commission's meetings. 
The only other reporters at all three hearings I attended worked for pornographic magazines such as Penthouse and Playboy. 
The networks covered only one morning in three weeks of hearings. 

   The decision not to publish the report apparently was based on a misguided judgment about the commission's recommendations. 
An editor at New American Library told me, "This book will promote censorship." 
Bantam told the New York Times, "We felt we would not be terribly comfortable promulgating that report, since many people here and in the industry have reservations about it." 

   Had the commission been better covered by the press, the public -- and publishers and bookstores -- would know that it virtually ignored Playboy, Penthouse and other pornography declared by most courts to be constitutionally protected examples of free speech. 
Its primary concern was child pornography and hard-core obscenity -- magazines with titles such as Anal Agony, Animal Action and Rope Discipline. 
The commission concluded that exposure to degrading porn or sexual violence caused an "increase in the incidence of sexual violence." 

   The commission's evidence:
   --Law-enforcement officials testified they invariably found porn in the possession of sex offenders -- on their person, in their cars or at their homes. 

   --Half of these offenders, interviewed in prison, admitted they were "incited to commit an offense" by the material. 
Rapists are 15 times as likely as others to have seen hard-core porn when they were only six to 10 years old. 

   --Social scientists gathered independently by Surgeon General C. Everett Koop concluded that porn changes attitudes, especially if sexual aggression is portrayed "as pleasurable for the victim." 
It increases acceptance of "coercion in sexual relations," which "appears to be related to sexual aggression. 
In laboratory settings, measuring short-term effects, exposure to violent pornography increases punitive behavior toward women." 

   --Testimony by victims was also convincing. 
One woman, whose incest with her father began at the age of eight, said she tried to resist. 
Her dad "would find magazines with articles and/or pictures with fathers and daughters. . . . 
He would say that if it was published in magazines that it had to be all right because magazines could not publish lies." 

   It was out of concern for such eight-year-olds that Congress has outlawed child pornography, laws upheld by the Supreme Court. 
Similarly, the Supreme Court has said, "Obscene material is unprotected by the First Amendment." 
And it defined that as depictions of "ultimate sexual acts," in works that lack "serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value." 

   Between 1981 and 1984 there were a total of only 15 federal indictments for obscenity. 
A few cities, however, have enforced obscenity laws and the impact has been dramatic. 
In Cincinnati, rapes, robberies and other felonies were down 83% five years after the city closed downtown adult bookstores and theaters in 1974. 

   The commission's recommendations were modest and don't support the charges that it urged censorship. 
First, there was no call for censorship of currently protected materials. 
The commission even proposed that obscene "materials consisting of the printed word {without pictures} simply not be prosecuted at all." 
While it did propose a few new laws (such as outlawing Dial-a-Porn), its basic recommendation was that existing obscenity laws be enforced. 

   These are sensible, noncontroversial conclusions in my view. 
But even if publishers and distributors disagree, that's no reason not to make the pornography report available to the American people. 
Their decision not to do so was ideological, not economic, and in making that judgment, they are practicing the very censorship they falsely accuse the commission of promoting. 
Legitimate publishers and distributors should be applauding the commission's proposals -- not stifling them. 

   ---
   Mr. McManus's columns, "Ethics &amp; Religion" and "Solutions," appear in about 200 newspapers. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
