ID: 174	RANK: 6	SCORE: 11.856550
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870707-0036 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Gerber Chief's Death Revives Speculation
On Company's Vulnerability to Takeover
---
By Jacob M. Schlesinger
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GEB WNEWS </IN>
<TEXT>
   Gerber Products Co.'s 61-year-old president and chief executive officer, Leo D. Goulet, died after an apparent heart attack Sunday, and a retired chief executive will fill the job until the Fremont, Mich., company can find a permanent replacement. 

   News of the death reignited longtime rumors that the baby-food producer could face a hostile takeover bid, although none has been made public. 
Gerber stock closed yesterday at $52.50, up $4 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

   Many traders felt yesterday that trading in Gerber stock increased because of Mr. Goulet's death, which some felt added to the continuing turmoil and increased the company's vulnerability. 
"A lot of arbs are in there today," said one arbitrager. 

   "His death causes some instability, and instability by nature makes a company more vulnerable," added John M. McMillin, an analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities. 

   Gerber said it has hired an independent consultant to find a new chief executive, and said it would consider an outsider for the first time in its 59-year history. 
The move is apparently aimed in part at quelling Wall Street criticism of Gerber management. 

   "Independence is No. 1 on their list" of factors in seeking a new chief executive, said William E. Gould, the manager of the New York firm conducting the search. 

   Until that person is found, Carl G. Smith, 66, will be acting chief executive. 
He held that post from 1982 through 1985, and served as chairman from 1983 through February 1986. 
Mr. Smith has remained a member of the board, and has been chairman of its executive committee. 

   Mr. Goulet's death came less than six weeks after his appointment as chief executive. 
He was promoted from chief operating officer after William L. McKinley, 63, took early retirement for what the company said were "personal reasons." 
As previously announced, Mr. McKinley will retain the chairmanship until later this month. 

   Gerber officials and directors had declined to elaborate on the reasons for Mr. McKinley's departure as chief executive, but analysts suggested Mr. McKinley was forced out because of shareholder dissatisfaction with the company's performance. 
Gerber net income in the fiscal year ended March 31 was $36.4 million, down 20% from $45.5 million a year earlier. 

   A major reason for the drop in net was widespread publicity about glass allegedly found in some jars of Gerber's baby food. 
Although those claims were never substantiated, the company was forced to substantially increase promotions and advertising. 
Mr. McKinley also was criticized for his management of the company's non-food operations, such as furniture and apparel. 

   Speculation about a takeover has been high because Gerber is a relatively small company, is No. 1 in the baby-food market, and is considered an underperformer. 

   A company spokesman wouldn't comment on why Gerber had decided to consider candidates outside the company, as well as insiders, for chief executive, although analysts said no obvious in-house replacements existed. 

   Mr. Gould, the search consultant, said his firm began its search before Mr. Goulet's death because the company was looking ahead to the next generation of leadership. 
"A review of the company's executive succession plan was launched in June to assure continued strong leadership in the foreseeable future," Mr. Smith, the acting chief executive, said in a prepared statement. 

   Gerber wants someone "around 50 to 55 years old who can give them 10 to 15 years of leadership," Mr. Gould said. 
He added that he has already interviewed four internal candidates and expects to interview about a half-dozen external candidates. 
The company hopes to have a replacement in two to four months. 

   Mr. Gould declined to say whether Mr. Smith was being considered as the new full-time chief executive. 
The company doesn't require retirement at age 65, the spokesman said. 
Mr. Smith couldn't be reached for comment. 

   Mr. Goulet, a native of Panama, joined Gerber in 1955 and spent most of his career in the company's international operations. 
In 1982, he became executive vice president of the general merchandise division and was elected to the board. 
The following year he took over as president and chief operating officer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
