ID: 174	RANK: 86	SCORE: 7.562007
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870812-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

---
By Vermont Royster</HL>
<DD> 08/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<TEXT>
   "As a responsible opposition to the president, Congress is almost a total failure. 
Hostile senators and congressmen bombard the White House from all directions. 
Typically they fail to advance alternative proposals. . . . 
{They} usually prefer to play the game of bargain and even forms of genteel blackmail with the president rather than to criticize forthrightly and dramatically." 

   The quotation is from James MacGregor Burns in his perceptive book on "Presidential Government." 
It comes to mind in the wake of these Iran-Contra hearings. 
A parade of administration officials has been grilled -- North, Poindexter, Shultz, Weinberger, Meese among others -- on who said what to whom, on who was responsible for what. 
But the real target of the investigating committee was the man in the White House, Ronald Reagan. 

   And the complaint was not really that arms were sold to Iran or that some money went to the Nicaraguan Contras; those issues were hardly ever addressed directly. 
The real complaint was that the White House did things without consulting Congress or even telling it what was being done. 

   What we have watched on our TV screens is a replay of the struggle for supremacy between Congress and the presidency that has been going on since the founding of our republic. 

   It was President Thomas Jefferson who in 1803 asserted a presidential power not visible in the Constitution when he purchased the entire Louisiana Territory from Napoleon, doubling the size of the then U.S., for some $15 million when he had only $2 million available in congressional appropriations. 
There was quite a political brouhaha but in the end the Senate approved the treaty. 

   Presidents have been asserting "implied" powers in the executive office ever since, with Congress -- or a part of it -- loudly grumbling that the chief executive exceeded his powers. 

   As a congressman, Abraham Lincoln denounced the Democrats' vigorous use of presidential power. 
As president, he increased the size of the Army and Navy in disregard of the existing law, suspended the writ of habeas corpus, declared martial law without authority and issued his Emancipation Proclamation without constitutional authority and over the objections of most of his cabinet. 
He also spent millions without congressional appropriations. 

   In more modern times, President Franklin Roosevelt sold arms (U.S. destroyers) in return for British bases on his own authority. 
President Truman launched the Korean War on his own initiative. 
President Kennedy didn't ask Congress for permission to launch the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba. 
President Carter undertook a covert action to free our Iranian-held prisoners that ended in disaster. 

   Some of these presidential decisions were vindicated by history, some not. 
In any event there is no shortage of examples of presidents exercising "executive power" without a by-your-leave from Congress, and often Congress was uninformed until the deed was done. 

   In nearly every case had the president gone to Congress for authority to do what he did, the result would have been a long drawn-out political battle. 
In some cases even if the president had finally won congressional approval, it would have come too late to make the action effective, or even possible. 
The way we today judge these past presidential actions depends on what came afterward. 
President Carter would have been a hero had his covert operation in Iran freed our hostages instead of ending calamitously on the desert sands. 

   None of these past examples, unfortunately, give us any clear idea about the mysterious "inherent powers" of the presidency. 
All they do is illustrate the tensions that exist between the two branches of our government and have existed since the beginning. 

   Take the present case reflected in the Iran-Contra hearings. 
All they have done is expose the confusion within the administration as to who was authorized to do what and the differences of opinion within it about what was done; two cabinet officers have testified that they opposed the arms sale to Iran. 
Neither Secretary Shultz nor Secretary Weinberger, however, challenged the president's right to make the final decision. 

   Nor, so far, has Congress. 
It has been content to play the game of harassment or, in James MacGregor Burns's phrase, to engage in "genteel blackmail rather than to criticize forthrightly and dramatically" either the arms sale or aid to the Contras. 
That will come later only if the senators and representatives sense that the public disapproves, something not yet clear. 

   So it will be too with President Reagan's decision to escort Kuwaiti ships into the Persian Gulf. 
If the operation proceeds successfully, we will hear little from Congress; if it meets with disasters, we will hear plenty. 

   What we are watching is another chapter in the continuing struggle between Congress and the president, one in which the president has not always won. 
After the Civil War Congress took back the main power, almost removing President Andrew Johnson from office. 
Thereafter Congress held the main power for some 30 years (the administrations of Grant through McKinley) until an assassin's bullet put Theodore Roosevelt in office. 

   TR made no secret of his views of his office. 
"I declined to accept the view that what was imperatively necessary for the nation could not be done by the president . . . the efficiency of this government depends upon its possessing a strong central executive." 

   He thereupon seized Panama, sent the fleet around the world to show American power, intervened in the affairs of Santo Domingo and Cuba, boldly took on the big corporations of his day. 
He was, then, the political ancestor, as well as kinsman, of that other Roosevelt. 
Since Theodore, the presidency has been a powerful office for those who would use it so. 

   Naturally that has not set well with Congress and does not to this day. 
But rarely has it successfully challenged the president on a large issue; its attacks come tangentially, as when Richard Nixon was driven from office over the bungling of a third-rate burglary. 

   Nonetheless, the struggle will continue. 
President Reagan will survive it because he's tough and his time is short. 
But the next president, whoever he may be, has my sympathy, for he will face it anew. 

   ---
   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
