ID: 174	RANK: 89	SCORE: 7.526816
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881101-0143 </DOCNO>
<HL> 'Spare Tires' of the Past Got Kicked as Much as Quayle </HL>
<AUTHOR> Leslie Southwick </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> CNG EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   The questions raised this year about Dan Quayle's readiness to assume the presidency have been incessant -- and lacking in historical perspective. 
Just how does Sen. Quayle compare with vice-presidential nominees of the past? 

   The Democrats have given us only one presidential nominee since 1968 with as much service in major offices as Sen. Quayle, and that was Walter Mondale. 
They also gave us Jimmy Carter (four years as governor), and George McGovern (10 years as congressman and senator). 
Mr. Mondale himself had only 12 years' service in major offices prior to being nominated for vice president in 1976. 

   In this century 49 people have been nominated for the vice presidency, and Sen. Quayle has served longer in major offices than 26 of them. 
Quite simply, Mr. Quayle has had more experience than most vice-presidential nominees. 

   And by no means is he the youngest of such nominees. 
That record -- close your eyes, Democrats -- is held by Franklin D. Roosevelt, who was 38 when nominated in 1920 for vice president. 
His most significant service had been as assistant secretary of the Navy. 
That must have been a very troubling notion, "President Franklin D. Roosevelt." 
Theodore Roosevelt, Richard Nixon and Tom Eagleton were similarly youthful nominees. 
For the record, only five other running mates this century have been as old as Lloyd Bentsen. 

   The alleged telling blow of the Oct. 5 Quayle-Bentsen debate was the icy retort by Sen. Bentsen that Sen. Quayle was no Jack Kennedy. 
Of course, to some voters that is a relief. 
Yet to those who have placed John F. Kennedy in the martyred-hero-pantheon, a few reminders are in order. 
Kennedy and Sen. Quayle started their careers in the House, then left after four or six years to beat incumbent senators who were national leaders in the opposing party -- Henry Cabot Lodge (Kennedy) and Birch Bayh (Quayle). 
They then served eight years in the Senate before being nominated on a national ticket. 
Kennedy, upon announcing for the presidency at age 42, was accused of being too youthful, inexperienced, and inattentive to his duties as a senator. 
He had been an indifferent student during much of his early schooling, but did well in college. 
Kennedy had a yearlong campaign to dispel those doubts before he was nominated for president. 

   His principal opponent was Lyndon B. Johnson -- and one of LBJ's proteges was Lloyd Bentsen, who on one recent memorable occasion called himself a good friend of Kennedy's. 
As was suggested later by Ted Sorenson, one of Kennedy's closest advisers, the memory of that friendship is a little difficult today to jog. 
Indeed, the memory of friendship between JFK and LBJ partisans is faint for everyone. 

   True, Kennedy served in World War II. Neither Gov. Dukakis nor Sen. Quayle served in the conflicts that raged during their young adulthoods. 
Sen. Quayle joined the National Guard during the Vietnam War. 
Gov. Dukakis stayed in school with a student deferment until the Korean War was over. 
George Bush on the other hand enlisted at age 18 and bypassed college until the war was over. 
Mr. Bentsen also served in the war. 
Thus the war experiences of Kennedy and Sen. Quayle say far more about the differences between World War II and Vietnam than they suggest differences about the men. 

   The emphasis on their own running mate by the Democrats is not unique in election annals, but it is rare. 
Since vice presidents are basically spare tires, such an emphasis does send a subliminal message that the voters should hope that the main tire goes flat. 
More common is the negative campaign against the opposing vice-presidential nominee, which of course the Democrats are also engaging in this year. 
For example, 100 years ago the Republicans found a useful foil in the Democratic vice presidential nominee, Allen Granberry Thurman. 
At 74, he was said to be too old and feeble to serve adequately as president, the reverse of this year's Quayle-baiting. 
Eight years later the Republicans presaged this year's criticism of the Bentsen selection by pointing out the overwhelming philosophical differences between the top of the ticket -- populist William Jennings Bryan -- and the businessman running-mate Arthur Sewall, who was selected for ideological balance. 
A major third party subsequently also nominated Bryan, but in a colorful and refreshing burst of consistency called Sewall a "wart on the ticket" and named a different running mate. 

   A brief look at past campaigns shows frequent attacks on opposing running mates. 
A scathing book was published about the 1880 Democratic nominee, William H. English, who was accused of being a heartless banker who had gleefully foreclosed on the weak and helpless. 
The author said English was one of "the few men who have no redeeming virtue." 
The Republicans had to take return fire because their number two man, Chester A. Arthur, was said to be a corrupt party hack. 
Four years later the Republican running mate, John A. Logan, was also under siege for alleged corruption. 

   In this century, the vice-presidential nominees who were faced with the most withering fire include FDR 1920 as being too young, inexperienced, and insubstantial; Henry A. Wallace in 1940 as being too radical; Harry Truman in 1944 as being the creature of a corrupt political machine; Richard Nixon in 1952 as having been too vicious in his anti-communism and too suspicious in his fund-raising; Spiro Agnew in 1968 and Robert Dole in 1976 for being too partisan in their campaigning; Tom Eagleton in 1972 for his mental health; and Geraldine Ferraro in 1984 for her husband's financial dealings. 

   The worst remarks about a running mate, however, were probably those applied to the first vice president of this century. 
They were made as frequently by opponents in his own party as by the opposite camp. 
When 41-year old Theodore Roosevelt was nominated in 1900, Republican National Chairman Mark Hanna called him "that damned cowboy," and thought he was too immature and rash to trust in the White House. 
Hanna rebuked those promoting the Rough Rider: "Don't any of you realize that there's only one life between this madman and the presidency?" 
Hanna's worst fears were realized when President William McKinley was assassinated, but the country did rather well under TR's leadership anyway. 

   Dan Quayle is neither the most nor the least experienced, the smartest nor the dullest, the oldest nor the youngest, running mate named by a major party this century. 
On balance his prospects for success should he have to assume the presidency seem about average, and satisfactory. 
Indeed, his unintentional role model for answering the question of what actions he would take should he become president could not have been better. 
Saying a prayer and calling the cabinet together was Mr. Quayle's initial answer to that morbid question. 
Spending a few minutes of silence with the late president's widow, then summoning the cabinet were exactly what Harry Truman in his memoirs said he did in 1945 at the death of FDR. 

   ---
   Mr. Southwick is a lawyer in Jackson, Miss. 
His book, "Presidential Also-Rans and Running Mates, 1788-1980," won an American Library Association award as a "Best Reference Work of 1984." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
