ID: 174	RANK: 91	SCORE: 7.475310
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870609-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
As the Century Turned
---
By Lee Lescaze</HL>
<DD> 06/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Gore Vidal's novelistic march through U.S. history here reaches the years 1895-1906 and the presidencies of William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt. 
It wasn't our nation's finest hour and this novel isn't Mr. Vidal's. 

   Perhaps the problem is that the novel lacks a towering central character. 
After reinventing Aaron Burr for an age that remembered him, if at all, only as one of history's bad guys, and humanizing Abraham Lincoln who had been so wrapped in glory by Carl Sandburg's interminable, adoring biography in earlier historical novels, Mr. Vidal is working with lesser figures here in his fifth fictional treatment of American history. 

   Geniuses come and go on the periphery -- Henry Adams, Brooks Adams, Henry James -- but the novel centers on a fictional woman, Caroline Sanford, who becomes a powerful Washington newspaper publisher, and John Hay, once secretary to Lincoln, now secretary of state for McKinley and Roosevelt. 

   In Hay, a wealthy, famous writer turned statesman, Mr. Vidal, a famous writer but only a would-be statesman, has a sort of mirror image of himself. 
And "Empire" (Random House, 486 pages, $22.50) is a forum for Vidalian jibes -- many of them delivered by Hay -- at the follies of U.S. politicians and the corruption of U.S. society. 
A major part of a secretary of state's job is defined as "to provide jobs that don't exist for the friends of senators who do." 
Caroline Sanford, rich, intelligent, French-educated and virginal, decides early on: "Sentimental religiosity and public stealing, that was the new world." 
Another character, disparaging Roosevelt, wonders: "Perhaps that was the politician's art: to bring to the obvious the appearance of novelty and passion." 

   When "Empire" begins, Hay is 60 years old and in failing health. 
Mr. Vidal, now 61, presents him as an autumnal voice seeking meaning in his own life and brooding upon mankind's follies. 
Early on Hay muses: "If I were to tell the truth I would have to confess that I have somehow managed to mislay my life. 
Through carelessness, I have lost track of time and now time is losing, rapidly, all track of me." 

   Hay also is the main voice for Mr. Vidal's opposition to the creation of an American empire, the cherished goal of Roosevelt, Sen. Henry Cabot Lodge and others who glory in the taking of Cuba and the Philippines from Spain. 
Jingoism rides high. 
"Asia is ours," says Lodge. 
Brooks Adams, guru to Roosevelt, proclaims: "If the Anglo-Saxon race is to survive -- and prevail -- we must go to war." 

   It's a debate as familiar as Nicaragua today or Vietnam 20 years ago. 
Equally fresh are some of the novel's discussions of sex and public life. 
Like Caroline Sanford, Gary Hart might ask whether "Americans really believe what they said {on sexual relations} or were . . . simply fearful of that ominous majority whose ignorance and energy set the national tone? 
They certainly never ceased to pretend in public that marriage was not only sacred but the stately terminus to romance." 

   But while Mr. Vidal makes much of his characters' thoughts and conversations, "Empire" is a curiously plotless book, almost totally lacking drama. 
Even in the fictional lives of Caroline and her brother Blaise what might be a bitter or damaging contest over their inheritance ends up with their amicably sharing the family mansion in France and their Washington newspaper. 

   Adultery, a homosexual seduction, a potentially career-destroying unmarried pregnancy, some family skeletons dragged from the closet, all get thrown into the mix, but Mr. Vidal doesn't seem to care. 
At times he doesn't seem to care about what he's saying either. 
It's hard to believe that Mr. Vidal, the antithesis of sophomoric, could write, as he does after the tragic death of Caroline's young fiance: "As Caroline comforted her maid, Blaise knew that she would be all right. 
On the other hand, he wondered, briefly, about the universe. 
Was it all right? or was the whole thing meaningless and random, and insensately cruel?" 

   He has a better time making fun of the idle rich at Newport. 
Or mocking the press. 
Or playing with mirrors of fact and fiction as when his heroine, seeking advice from Henry Adams, likens herself to Mrs. Lightfoot Lee, the heroine of Adams's wonderful Washington novel "Democracy." 

   But there's far too little of Mr. Vidal having such fun in "Empire." 
The way publishing operates, however, what's between the yellow covers of "Empire" doesn't matter. 
It's already an assured best seller, published with a giant first printing of 200,000 copies and as a Book-of-the-Month-Club main selection. 
And why not? 
After 21 novels, five plays, a book of short stories and five collections of essays in a distinguished 41-year career, when Mr. Vidal writes a novel it ought to be a center-ring event. 

   But is all history center-ring material? 
Is everything grist for the historical novelists' mills? 
At the rate those mills are grinding now, there will be a place in fiction for everyone from every administration. 
I wonder what future readers will make of Billy Carter. 
Or of Albert Hakim. 

   ---
   Mr. Lescaze is the Journal's deputy foreign editor. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
