ID: 225	RANK: 13	SCORE: 20.238449
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870515-0003 </DOCNO>
<HL> CBS Will Replace Most Fall Shows Ever
In Gamble to Boost Sagging TV Ratings
---
By Peter W. Barnes
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 05/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CBS GE CCB
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   CBS Inc. unveiled its most radically restructured fall prime-time television schedule ever in a gamble to revive its stagnant ratings. 

   The company said its second-ranked television network, which posted its lowest prime-time ratings ever in the just-ended 1986-87 season, will replace eight of its 22 hours of weekly prime-time programming in September and bring back 15 current series. 

   That is the most hours of programming ever replaced by the CBS network, topping the 7 1/2 hours it scrapped in fall 1977, CBS research officials said. 
In recent seasons, CBS typically has replaced five or fewer hours of programming each fall. 

   Among other changes, CBS said it will drop two of its current three nights of movies, or four hours of programming in movies alone. 
And at the critical 8 p.m. EST start of prime time, it is introducing new shows -- mainly hourlong dramas -- on five nights. 

   "It's a daring schedule," said Joel M. Segal, executive vice president for Ted Bates Worldwide Inc., New York. 
"They've taken extraordinary steps to stop their decline." 

   CBS previously has acknowledged that its network posted operating losses for the 1986 fourth quarter and this year's first quarter because of its lower ratings and the soft national advertising market. 

   CBS historically has been the top-ranked network, requiring fewer changes in its schedule than its rivals. 
But for the past two seasons, CBS has finished second behind a powerful National Broadcasting Co., which has been helped by "The Cosby Show" and other hits. 

   "We hope we're going to be right up there nip and tuck" with NBC this fall, Laurence A. Tisch, CBS president and chief executive officer, said. 
"And maybe we'll be ahead." 

   CBS said it will introduce seven new dramas but only two new half-hour comedies. 
Among the new shows are "Tour of Duty," a one-hour drama about a platoon of young U.S soldiers on combat duty in Viet Nam in the late 1960s; "Beauty and the Beast," a one-hour version of the classic story set in present-day New York; "Jake and the Fatman," starring William "Cannon" Conrad as a tough district attorney; and "Frank's Place," a comedy about a very proper college professor who inherits a New Orleans restaurant. 

   Canceled shows include "The Wizard," "Outlaws," "The New Mike Hammer" and "Scarecrow and Mrs. King." 
CBS officials said the network's "West 57th" news program tentatively will return to the schedule in fall, but that its future hinges on its summer ratings. 
If canceled, CBS then will be replacing nine hours of shows in September. 

   Replacing old shows is always a gamble for any network because existing shows at least have defined audiences and track records, and replacements may attract even fewer viewers. 
But they could also turn out to be hits, and CBS hasn't had a new top-10 show since the debut of "Murder, She Wrote" in fall 1984. 

   By dropping movies, CBS hopes to improve the odds that it will develop more hit series. 
Despite the large number of movies, miniseries and specials, a network's fortunes typically rise or fall on the strength of regular series programming. 

   CBS also hopes in part to build its 8-to-9-p.m.-EST time slot. 
Under the concept of "audience flow," a viewer hooked into the schedule at 8 p.m. will tend to watch the shows that follow on that network, helping programs later in the evening. 
NBC's strength has been in its ablility to program well at 8 p.m. 

   CBS, however, has "not been successful in recent years with youth-appeal comedies or youth-appeal dramas" at 8 p.m., said Betsy Frank, senior vice president and associate research director for DFS Dorland, New York. 
"This year, they are trying to reach adults at 8 p.m. -- there's really not much for kids throughout this schedule." 
But, she added, "There are so many new shows, there is so much that can go wrong." 

   NBC, a unit of General Electric Co., said it will replace only four hours of programming in fall, while ABC, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., is expected to announce its new schedule shortly. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
