ID: 239	RANK: 4	SCORE: 9.559299
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871215-0138 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Film: James Brooks Does It Again
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 12/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The dialogue in "Broadcast News" is so quick and clever I wanted to see the movie again the minute it ended because I knew I couldn't have possibly caught it all. 
I caught most of it though, and certainly enough to know that this is one terrific movie. 

   It's also a relief to those of us who admired director James Brooks's first picture, the 1983 release "Terms of Endearment." 
It's a relief because after "Terms" became a big box-office hit and won nearly every major film award, Mr. Brooks disappeared from public view. 

   There are some film directors, like Stanley Kubrick, who typically take long breaks between movies. 
But Mr. Brooks was a television man who'd spent much of his adult life working nonstop putting together great TV shows such as "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and "Taxi." 
The role of reclusive auteur didn't seem to fit. 

   There were occasional reports over the years that he was doing research in Washington for a project that had something to do with reporters. 
As time passed, though, it seemed possible that Mr. Brooks had been overwhelmed by the enormous success of his first non-television project. 
Maybe, consumed by the thought that his next picture had to be really important, he would disappear, the way Terrence Malick apparently has, to forever seek material that could never be good enough to commit to film. 

   But no, Mr. Brooks has resurfaced with a film that doesn't show a trace of self-consciousness. 
"Broadcast News" does take on an important subject: how newly budget-conscious networks have come to rely more on glitz and market testing as they cut back on non-glamourous, therefore expendable, personnel. 

   But Mr. Brooks -- who also produced and wrote the film -- works his cogent observations about the network news business into a deft comedy that's written with the zing of the '30s greats. 
He knows how to grab an audience and it's not with lectures on the restructuring of the broadcasting industry. 

   So he's set up a romantic triangle between three representative types: the pretty-boy anchor, the intellectual reporter, the opinionated girl producer. 
They're great characters, too, remarkably authentic but also quirky in ways that make them lovable. 
In fact, Mr. Brooks has put together a great group of actors and gotten great performances out of them. 
Jack Nicholson is a stitch in a small part as the reigning network anchor, a pompous man whose suits are just tight enough to make him seem puffed up. 

   But Mr. Brooks doesn't know how to draw a really nasty character. 
Even the network news president with the undertaker's manner has a certain oily charm (he's played with great style by Peter Hackes, who was an NBC news correspondent before he made his film debut here). 
Mr. Brooks's characters do, however, have real edge -- and real neuroses, which they act out convincingly. 
One of them, the reporter played by the hilarious Albert Brooks, may well be speaking for director Brooks (who is no relation but a good friend) when he says: "Wouldn't this be a great world if insecurity and desperation made us more attractive?" 

   In any case, it's easy to believe director Brooks when he says he wrote the role of the brainy, not-so-photogenic reporter, Aaron Altman, for his old pal Albert. 
Aaron is a familiar type, the nerdy kid who got dumped on by the jocks in high school then spends the rest of his life compensating. 
Aaron is best friends with Jane Craig (Holly Hunter), the tough little hyperkinetic producer who thinks she's always right because she generally is. 
Ms. Hunter, who first displayed her sassy, eccentric comic gift in "Raising Arizona," drives the picture forward. 
She's a fireball. 
Her Jane is an obsessive, the kind of person who forges ahead to what she wants and says what she thinks without thinking of the consequences, because she is so sure of herself. 
However, this is a romantic comedy so her systems break down when she isn't working on the perfect newscast. 

   Though Aaron is in love with Jane, or likes to think that he is, the picture's most sensitively realized moments are the scenes that show what make these two such good friends. 
When Jane is heading off for a date with Tom, the handsome anchor, and Aaron is about to try out for a new on-camera job, she checks him out. 
She sighs, reaches inside her evening jacket, pulls out her shoulder pads and slips them inside his coat. 

   Jane and Aaron are defenders of the old guard. 
They have an idea about what network news should be, though you can see from the way they get hepped up by the frenzy that accompanies every newscast that they get a visceral thrill out of the game, too. 

   Tom Grunick (William Hurt), the well-endowed blond Jane falls in love with, represents the new style. 
He isn't dumb. 
He isn't a genius. 
But he can read the news without getting sweaty and he looks great on camera. 
Mr. Hurt plays him astutely, letting you see gradually that he isn't just the pretty face you saw at first before Mr. Hurt let you get to know him better. 

   He's got a skill, and Mr. Brooks establishes that by putting Tom on the spot shortly after he shows up in Washington. 
The news gang is called away from a party to cover a breaking story and Tom, not Aaron -- who's familiar with the subject -- is put on the air. 
The atmosphere behind the control booth is frenzied. 
The tape editor is working away, Jane is telling Tom what to do through a microphone. 

   You hear her voice, coaxing Tom through the story, as the camera glides around behind Tom's handsome head, where you can see that he's all wired up like a ventriloquist's dummy. 
But the way Jane's voice comes across the soundtrack you get a sense of what it's like to have this voice inside your head, while you're talking, and you have to respect Tom for this particular talent. 
He's good. 

   You don't admire him, exactly, but you don't just dismiss him either. 
That's what's great about this movie. 
Mr. Brooks lulls you into thinking that you've got it all figured out and tosses a new perspective at you, a little twist. 
And you get to laugh, too. 
That's what I call entertainment. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
