ID: 239	RANK: 51	SCORE: 3.475401
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880602-0136 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film: Summer Fun With Hanks, Hogan and Stallone </HL>
<AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   The premise of "Big" may seem familiar: A 12-year-old boy finds himself occupying the body of a 35-year-old man and copes with the consequences. 
That's because three movies have already tried it within the past year ("Like Father, Like Son," "Vice Versa" and "18 Again!") with varying degrees of failure. 

   "Big" differs from its recent predecessors in a couple of crucial ways: The biological transmogrification goes only one way; no adult shrinks to boy-size here. 
More importantly, "Big" doesn't merely try to spin as many gags as possible out of a skimpy concept. 
After repeating a couple of obvious jokes (the suddenly grown-up boy's astonishment at new-found hairiness, for example), "Big's" collaborators move on with a comedy that is observant, fresh and extremely entertaining. 

   This is one of those kicky Hollywood pictures in which everything -- the hilarity and even the sentimentality -- comes together just exactly right. 
Who would have thought that Penny Marshall, best known for her part in TV's "Laverne and Shirley," would recover from her embarrassing film directing debut ("Jumpin' Jack Flash") with something this sprightly and sure-handed? 

   She isn't the only sister of a successful brother-director to shine here (hers is Garry Marshall: "Nothing in Common," "Flamingo Kid"). 
The adroit script, the first either of its co-authors has had produced, was written by Gary Ross and Anne Spielberg, sister of Steven. 
Add to the credit pile co-producers James L. Brooks ("Terms of Endearment," "Broadcast News") and Robert L. Greenhut (11 Woody Allen movies). 

   I am glad to be able to say that all these clever and talented people have actually come up with the goods. 
The biggest goodie is Tom Hanks as the little boy after his wish (to be big) has been granted. 
Much of the comedy in this movie is physical; it is, after all, focused on the personality of a 12-year-old boy. 
Without forcing the matter Mr. Hanks has a startling ability (perhaps worrisome, in his real life) to take on the mannerisms and facial expressions of an adolescent. 

   When Josh Baskin, the Hanks character, finds himself alone in a seedy Times Square hotel shortly after he has "grown up," he starts to cry. 
But Mr. Hanks doesn't just cry, he blubbers, with the absolute misery particular to kids. 

   Later, he settles into a job at a toy company. 
He rises quickly to the top, following the worn Hollywood principle that innocents must always prove themselves wiser than world-weary cynics. 
He shows up at a sleek office party in his idea of elegant evening wear: a white tuxedo not unlike the ones the late Elvis used to wear in Vegas. 
He heads straight for the food, and does to the chic hors d'oeuvres what we'd all like to do. 
He licks the cream cheese filling then tosses aside the celery. 
Then he picks up a baby corn, gives it the puzzled stare it deserves, then daintily devours it as if it were a full-grown cob. 
It may not sound like much, but this sleight of mouth is hilarious on-screen. 

   I don't want to do what the picture's irritating trailer does: give away the best moments of the movie, which are nearly all unexpected. 
You'll see what I mean when you watch Mr. Hanks and Robert Loggia, the toy company owner, soft-shoeing on a giant piano keyboard. 

   Naturally, they're dancing to the two duets that, with "Blue Moon," make up most kids' entire piano repertoire: "Heart and Soul" and "Chopsticks." 
There is an obvious affinity here with a certain kind of smart, generous child, the kind of boy who readily knows the name of Christopher Columbus's fourth ship. 
But adults are in command, smart adults with a great gift for double entendre -- and enough self-confidence to allow the adults in this movie to be almost as intelligent as the kids. 

   The picture is especially sly on the subject of romance and tenderness. 
Elizabeth Perkins is quite appealing as the career woman who doesn't realize that she's experiencing virginal love all over again. 
John Heard does a nice turn as the snitty, bland careerist whom Josh upstages at work and in romance. 
The kiddie actors, David Moscow as young Josh and Jared Rushton as his best friend Billy, are neither too cute nor too raunchy. 
Like most everything in this picture they are honestly drawn, good natured and full of nice surprises. 

   ---
   About 100 movies will be opening in theaters before Labor Day, so the idea of seeing a movie that you've seen before, in slightly altered form, may seem preposterous. 
On the other hand, most of the movies that spawn sequels were preposterous to begin with, which may be precisely what makes these summer spinoffs so attractive to their fans. 
They tend to deliver what they promise, so those who feel cheated weren't paying attention. 

   If given the choice between "Rambo III" and "Crocodile Dundee II," I'd recommend the latter only because I prefer Paul Hogan's ironic, self-deprecating machismo to Sylvester Stallone's hulk. 
More gets blown up in "Rambo III." 

   The stories are new. 
This time Rambo pulls off his superhuman Soviet-blasting stunts in Afghanistan, not quite as late on the scene as he was in Vietnam. 
Not very exciting; very noisy. 
"Dundee" reverses the order of the first movie; this time the action starts in New York and ends in Australia. 
Not very noisy. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
