ID: 239	RANK: 69	SCORE: 3.254413
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880405-0071 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Theater: Shoddy Shakespeare, Serious Shue and More --- Sylviane Gold </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
    Without a sense of tragedy, or just grandeur, even a great play by Shakespeare becomes ordinary. With it, a simple little romance becomes satisfying theater. Off-Broadway theatergoers often see intimacy confused with narrowness of vision. Herewith, a guide for the perplexed:
   "Julius Caesar," closed. 
There should be an addition to the never-eat-at-a-place-called-Mom's / never-play-cards-with-a-guy-named-Doc rulebook. 
Never put movie stars in plays that need togas. 
The New York Shakespeare Festival just cast Al Pacino and Martin Sheen in this quintessential toga play, and it didn't do much for the play -- or the actors. 
They looked silly; Mr. Pacino sputtered -- Marc Antony shouldn't; and Mr. Sheen muttered -- Brutus shouldn't. 
Hordes of extras carrying flaming torches hither and yon couldn't save this misbegotten production. 
Nevertheless, its brief run was a sellout, and the festival is going to have to decide just what it's about in this extended Shakespeare "marathon." 
Does it want to mount every Shakespeare play just for the record? 
Or will these productions have some larger artistic purpose? 
The first entry, "A Midsummer Night's Dream," set in northern Brazil, fell easily into the second category. 
This, the second production in the series, was strictly about big-name actors in sandals and sheets. 

   "Wenceslas Square," at the New York Shakespeare Festival's Public Theater. 
Larry Shue's serious, well-intentioned effort explores the evasions and accommodations of a group of Czech artists and intellectuals in the years following the Soviet invasion of 1968. 
By placing his play in the memory of a scenic designer who, as a naive young student, had accompanied an older professor on a research trip to Prague, the late Mr. Shue was reaching for a complexity that he couldn't quite attain. 
Instead of being enriched by the three-tiered view of events -- the young man's, the older man's and the narrator's -- the play is weakened: We never figure out if "Wenceslas Square" means to move us with the professor's sad encounters with his old friends, with the student's expanding perceptions, or with the narrator's rueful recollections of both. 
Instead of the powerful emotional pull inherent in the subject, we get only a series of anecdotes -- fine as far as they go, but of course, not going very far. 
There are some nice character sketches by Victor Garber and Dana Ivey, who play all the Czechs; and newcomer Bruce Norris does well as the wide-eyed student. 
Loren Sherman's turntable set makes for some effective entrances and exists. 
But the roof that shelters this play has also sheltered works on the same subject by Vaclav Havel. 
Their eloquence and passion put to shame Mr. Shue's sincere but ultimately pat sentiments. 
Once again, nice is not enough. 

   "Boy's Life," at Lincoln Center's Newhouse Theater. 
If "Wenceslas Square" doesn't quite rise to its lofty theme, this play, by Howard Korder, never leaves the nadir where it starts out. 
Don, Phil and Jack are three of the stupidest louts you would ever hope to cold-shoulder in a singles bar. 
Mr. Korder's short scenes follow these galoots to a series of assignations with a quintet of women and with one another. 
At first, one wants to take the women's side, but, as written by Mr. Korder and acted by members of the Atlantic Theater Company, they are only slightly less obnoxious than the men. 
The danger in writing about shallow people is that you will join them rather than beat them, and that's what's happened here. 
This play sneaked into Lincoln Center as an interim booking and did so well that it's been extended into June, which just goes to show, as they are saying here at their upstairs theater: anything goes. 

   "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune," at the Westside Arts Theatre. 
This play, by Terrence McNally, is a kind of half-"Moonstruck," with its pair of middleaged losers finding belated romance under the influence of a full moon and a famous composer. 
Here, an impulsive short-order cook turns a one-night stand into a battle for the soul of the tired, cynical waitress he's fallen for. 
He's proposing love, marriage, a family while she's proposing a postcoital snack and maybe a second date sometime. 
It's funny and touching, and its final image -- two people sitting on the edge of a bed brushing their teeth to the strains of Debussy -- captures the beautiful foolishness of conjugal life. 
Kathy Bates has been playing the no-nonsense Frankie to perfection since the play began at the Manhattan Theatre Club last year. 
The romantic Johnny is currently being acted by Joseph Hindy. 
And the silken voice on the radio belongs to Dominic Cuskern. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
