ID: 239	RANK: 77	SCORE: 3.162422
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880203-0049 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film: The Rabbit's Pajamas </HL>
<AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   French film director Jean-Loup Hubert felt bad when a film of his was canceled two weeks before shooting was scheduled to begin. 
So he sat down to write the script for another picture. 
I don't know if it raised his spirits, but the movie that was made from this second script, "The Grand Highway," did raise mine. 
And it earned a lot of francs last year in Mr. Hubert's "patrie." 
Now it's here, charming, autobiographical, seemingly no more complicated than the cartoons Mr. Hubert used to draw for a living. 

   A pregnant Parisienne, abandoned by her husband with their little boy, parks the child with friends in the country and goes off to give birth. 
Her remarkably naive son learns something about life from the country folk -- almost as much as what they learn from him. 

   Believe me, you really haven't seen this film before. 
Though it is yet another coming-of-age story, Mr. Hubert has re-created a summer he spent as a boy in Brittany with unsentimental clarity and humor. 
He's done so with a vibrant group of performers, including his own son, Antoine, cast in the part of the city boy, Louis. 

   He's innocent and somber, a sweet, awkward kid who's apprehensive about his "vacation" in the country -- with justice. 
After the bus deposits him and his mother by the edge of the highway, they start to make their way down a hot country road. 
A gruff-looking man offers Louis a lift in his wheelbarrow. 
When he hears the two are off to see Marcelle, he snorts, "She's a real shrew." 

   Louis's mother, Marcelle's friend, grabs Louis away from the stranger and they continue on their sweaty way. 
Mr. Hubert's camera precedes them to Marcelle's house and focuses on a dead rabbit hanging from the doorway. 
The sight of that poor dead little bunny is unnerving enough. 
Then someone plunges a knife into its eye; blood pours out. 
But "The Grand Highway" isn't a horror movie; most of its surprises aren't that abrupt. 
The camera pulls back and lets us see that the person handling the knife is the brisk, somewhat faded Marcelle. 
With her bloody hand, she casually shakes Louis's hand and asks the horrified little boy if he's ever seen "Mr. 
Rabbit take off his pajamas?" 
Without missing a beat, she slices the fur away. 

   However, this isn't a picture about how little Louis turns vegetarian. 
The skinning of the rabbit is just the first of many experiences for which his sheltered life hasn't prepared him. 
His parents concealed the full details of their marital problems from him, and his mother didn't really explain that his father had decamped. 
But in his new home, Marcelle and her husband, Pelo, battle right in front of the boy. (Pelo is the man on the road who told Louis that Marcelle was a shrew.) 
And the fighting isn't just a storm that will blow over. 

   Louis is quick to notice the mysterious trouble and tension between Pelo and Marcelle. 
The French actress Anemone plays Marcelle, a woman who seems emphatically pragmatic (she skins rabbits and plucks the feathers from chickens without a blink). 
Yet even as she moves briskly about her business there's something hollow about her, as though her skinny frame might collapse any minute. 
Her submerged grief asserts itself palpably; she goes about her tasks with the nervous energy chain smokers unleash on their cigarettes. 

   No wonder Louis -- already yearning for his absentee father -- gravitates toward Pelo. 
The ruggedly handsome Richard Bohringer forces you to see the tragic dimension in Pelo almost immediately, even when he's behaving like a brute toward Marcelle. 

   The person who serves as Louis's guide through this strange, rough world is Martine, a mischievous little prankster who barrels through life without worrying about the consequences. 
Vanessa Guedj is terrific as this matter-of-fact imp. 
Trotting barefoot on gravel without flinching, she's solid, a little moose. 
This 10-year-old wisenheimer tells Louis what gonorrhea is, and taunts him for looking at her white panties -- which she constantly reveals as she prances around in her little summer dresses. 
Yet she's basically no coquette; she's a pragmatist who's decided to make her peace with life by poking fun at it. 

   The children's escapades give the picture spirit and a sense of fun. 
Unlike so many movies about children, however, this one considers adult passion and despair worth paying attention to as well. 

   ---
   Neither success at the European box office nor adult subject matter guarantee that a movie is worth seeing. 
Case in point: "Julia and Julia," a pseudo-Hitchcockian thriller starring Kathleen Turner that wowed Italy, where it was made. 

   Directed by Peter Del Monte, it's a thick, psychological drama about a woman who sometimes thinks she's a tragic widow, and sometimes thinks she's a happily married adulteress. 
Both of Ms. Turner's Julias, their hair dyed corn-silk blond, are histrionic and plump (the actress was pregnant while the movie was being shot). 

   The point of this exercise was for Italy's RAI television network to demonstrate that movies can be produced more cheaply and just as well on high definition video as on film. 
They made their point, but the movie is a mess. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
