ID: 239	RANK: 79	SCORE: 3.154486
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880526-0140 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: TV: Front Row at Carnegie Hall, Back Seat at the Indy 500 </HL>
<AUTHOR> Martha Bayles </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Thursday, May 26, 8-9 p.m. EDT, on CBS: "48 Hours." 
This innovative new series from CBS News does not claim to take an in-depth, investigative look at its subjects. 
Instead, it delivers fast-moving sights, sounds and reportorial innuendos. 
Start Memorial Day weekend by watching this week's segment, "The Warriors," skitter over the surface of military training today. 

   Friday, May 27, 9-11 p.m. EDT, on CBS: "Irving Berlin's 100th Birthday Salute." 
Not every star of stage and screen will be there, and not every one of Mr. Berlin's 1,500 songs will be performed. 
But when this lavish Carnegie Hall celebration was taped (on May 11, Mr. Berlin's actual centennial) under the auspices of the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, it came pretty close to including all of them. 

   Friday, May 27, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on PBS (PBS air dates and times vary, so check local listings): "Jacksonville Jazz Festival VIII." 
He's only 70, but Dizzy Gillespie has been attracting a few celebrations of his own lately. 
This distillation of the annual jazz festival in Jacksonville, Fla., features such pop/jazz fusion stars as George Howard and George Benson, as well as Dixieland's Al Hirt -- the latter two joining Dizzy in an unprecedented jam session. 

   Saturday, May 28, 2:30-3:30 p.m. EDT, on CBS: The 1988 NCAA Men's Volleyball Championship. 
After all those soft-drink ads featuring California stalwarts playing volleyball on the beach, it should be fun to see the real thing: the University of Southern California mixing it up with the University of California at Santa Barbara -- even though the match will be held in surfless Fort Wayne, Ind. 

   Saturday, May 28, 8-10 p.m. EDT, on HBO (repeated May 31 and June 6, 12, 16 and 18): "Clinton and Nadine." 
The stars are trendy: Ellen Barkin ("The Big Easy") and Andy Garcia ("The Untouchables") play mixed-up lovers who manage to unmix each other. 
The plot is timely: They meet while tracking down shady arms dealers and drug runners between the U.S. and Central America. 
The production is slick: hip humor, sly characterizations, offbeat action. 
The ending is simple-minded: try not to be disappointed. 

   Sunday, May 29-Thursday, June 2; 9-10 p.m. EDT, on the Discovery Channel: "As They See It: The Soviet Nightly News." 
During the Moscow Summit, countless network and cable cameras will be rolling, and innumerable reporters' tongues will be wagging. 
If you grow tired of listening to our side, tune in for their side, as Hodding Carter hosts the week's "Vremya" broadcasts, edited and translated by TDC in cooperation with Orbita Technologies. 

   Sunday, May 29, 11 a.m.-3:30 p.m. EDT, on ABC: The Indianapolis 500. 
Pretend you're sitting in the back seat of Bobby Rahal's Lola Judd (not that it has a back seat), peering over his right shoulder as he accelerates. such will be one vantage point in this year's "up close and personal" coverage of the race. 

   Sunday, May 29, 1-3 p.m. EDT; Saturday, June 4, noon-3 p.m. EDT; and Sunday, June 5, 9 a.m.-2 p.m. EDT; on NBC: The French Open. 
If you prefer bouncing white balls to hurtling machinery, catch the pre-Wimbledon excitement from Paris. 

   Sunday, May 29, 9-11 p.m. EDT, on NBC: "To Heal a Nation." 
Here's another way to observe Memorial Day: watch this TV film about former Army infantryman Jan C. Scruggs (played by Eric Roberts), who initiated the four-year effort to build the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington, D.C. Written and co-produced by Lionel Chetwynd, who made "Hanoi Hilton," this GE Theater presentation has some of that movie's strengths (it's fair, evenhanded and factually accurate) as well as some of its weaknesses (it's too episodic to work as a dramatic whole). 

   Monday, May 30, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on CBS: "The 16th Annual American Film Institute Life Achievement Award: A Salute to Jack Lemmon." 
The title may not be catchy, but it's descriptive. 
Julie Andrews will preside, along with Shirley MacLaine, Walter Matthau, Michael Douglas, Steve Martin, and AFI head George Stevens Jr. 

   Tuesday, May 31, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on ABC: "Liza Minelli: Triple Play." 
Ms. Minelli is renowned for her versatility as a performer, but all the same, this oddball special is a challenge for her. 
In the space of one hour, it features her in a "minidrama" by playwright Lanford Wilson; a "minicomedy" by two more playwrights, Terrence McNally and Wendy Wasserstein; and a "minimusical" from songwriters John Kander and Fred Ebb. 

   Tuesday, May 31, 10-11 p.m. EDT, on PBS: "Four Lives: Portraits of Manic Depression." 
Having suffered from this debilitating illness herself, it must have taken courage for actress Patty Duke to host this documentary about four fellow sufferers, their families and those who treat them in a clinic at Dallas-Ft. 
Worth's Baylor University Medical Center. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
