ID: 239	RANK: 82	SCORE: 3.129349
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871123-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Two Former Executives Aspire to Top
The Best-Seller List With Timely Tales
---
By Laura Landro
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Steven Sohmer and Kenneth Lipper hail from different coasts and different worlds. 
Mr. Sohmer is a former network executive who briefly headed a Hollywood studio, while Mr. Lipper is a onetime Wall Street investment banker who had a short-lived career in politics. 

   But they do share one thing in common: a burning desire to get on the best-seller list. 
They aren't aiming to enlighten business readers with the next "Iacocca." 
They would rather beat Sidney Sheldon to the top of the fiction heap. 

   Although neither is likely to win any literary prizes, both have picked timely subjects. 
Mr. Sohmer's theme is sleaze-ridden presidential politics in "Favorite Son," a 500-page thriller just published by Bantam Books Inc. Bantam's sister book club, the Literary Guild, is offering it as its main selection for January. 
The novel, which began as a screenplay, will be published in 15 countries next year. 

   Mr. Lipper's subject, insider trading, couldn't be more topical. 
He's written a paperback "novelization" of the screenplay for the new movie, "Wall Street," that Berkley Publishing Inc. is bringing out this week. 
A 46-year-old former partner at Lehman Brothers and an ex-managing director of Salomon Brothers Inc., Mr. Lipper served as chief technical adviser to the Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. in return for a small equity interest. 
He's currently at work on a novel about political corruption, drawing on his days as deputy mayor of New York and a failed 1982 bid for City Council president. 

   "Favorite Son" is regarded in publishing circles as an impressive first novel. 
Mr. Sohmer began writing it last year, when he was president of Coca-Cola Co.'s Columbia Pictures Inc. unit and a producer friend told him it was a terrible idea for a screenplay. 
A Washington Post book reviewer hailed "Favorite Son" as "an engaging and entertaining political thriller liberally laced with sleaze, treachery, conspiracy and blackmail." 

   Mr. Sohmer says he started out wanting to be a writer, and even published a book of short stories in 1965. 
But he decided he couldn't make a living at it, and went into advertising and later broadcasting. 
Two years ago, at 43, he was a top promotion executive at General Electric Co.'s National Broadcasting Co. unit, but noticed that he "was the oldest programming executive at NBC's entertainment division, and it wouldn't be long before the young guys showed me the door." 
So he took up writing again in his spare time. 

   His worries about the pitfalls of an executive career in Hollywood proved well-founded. 
Coca-Cola hired him to become chief operating officer of Columbia under then-Chief Executive Officer Guy McElwaine. 
When Mr. McElwaine lost his job shortly afterward, Coca-Cola decided to replace him with British producer David Puttnam, who in turn decided to let Mr. Sohmer go before being fired himself 18 months after that. 

   Coca-Cola settled Mr. Sohmer's contract by setting him up in his own production company on the studio lot. 
He finished the novel and became executive producer of the coming Bill Cosby movie, "Leonard: Part VI," which Mr. Sohmer initially helped bring to the studio. 

   "Favorite Son," focuses on the meteoric rise of a young senator after he is wounded during the assasination of a Nicaraguan Contra leader. 
In the novel, Mr. Sohmer frequently drops the names of real network news figures and other media heavies and politicians. 
He even manages to plug NBC's "The Cosby Show." 
He says some of the less savory characters are based on real people he knew in Hollywood, transferred to Washington settings. 
He says he would like to see the book made into a movie, but worries that "I have to live down my executive status in order to become accepted as a writer." 

   Mr. Lipper may have even more of a problem becoming a literary lion. 
The plot and characters of "Wall Street," the paperback, came right from the screenplay written for the movie by Stanley Weiser and Oliver Stone -- the director and writer of "Platoon." 
Mr. Lipper cites a prize-winning high school essay and some editorial-page pieces in the New York Times as his writing experience -- and the help along the way of such writer pals as Kurt Vonnegut, who told him his early efforts were "crap." 

   "Wall Street" focuses on a young, ambitious trader who gets caught up in a web of insider trading with an unscrupulous corporate raider named Gordon Gekko. 
As technical adviser, Mr. Lipper says he used his experience and connections on Wall Street to contribute key scenes and "lifestyle" information to the film; in the book, he fleshes out the characters and tries to provide motives and background information. 
He also got the filmmakers access to such inner sanctums as the New York Stock Exchange and the trading room at Salomon Brothers. 

   Mr. Stone, the movie's writer and director, says Mr. Lipper's aid was "all-encompassing." 
He helped the actors on everything from hanging around with real Wall Street traders to teaching them the right body language. 
Mr. Stone says some of Mr. Lipper's criticisms were "hard to take," but helpful. 
The two occasionally disagreed: For the book, Mr. Stone thought the Gekko character should have been a street kid from Queens or Brooklyn; Mr. Lipper wanted a poor Arkansas farm boy. 
"I let him run with it," says Mr. Stone. 

   Mr. Lipper says his primary contribution to the movie and book was to convince the filmmakers that Wall Street isn't just a giant "casino," and that insider trading is an "aberration." 
In the end, the bad guys get caught, but the young trader has a shot at redemption. 
"This is not a condemnation of Wall Street," Mr. Lipper stresses. 

   Mr. Lipper, who now runs a family investment concern, says he had to "crash" the book version of "Wall Street" in 2 1/2 months last summer at his East Hampton, N.Y., vacation home. 
Although Berkley had planned to release "Wall Street" after the film's opening in mid-December, the publisher is rushing it out to stores this week to take advantage of the stock market collapse. 
Berkley obviously thinks the book will sell: It is printing 600,000 copies instead of the 100,000 typical for a movie tie-in. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
