ID: 239	RANK: 94	SCORE: 3.035291
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870521-0163 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film:
The Kids Are Keeping Mum About the Corpse
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 05/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Provocative" isn't a word that comes up much when you talk about the movies these days (not nearly as much as "stupid"). 
Yet "River's Edge" is just that: provocative -- and disturbing, something for one adult to hash over with another. 

   At its simplest level, the movie is about a group of teen-agers who decide not to turn in a pal who has killed his girlfriend. 
The story, however, goes well beyond the simple question of whether to nark or not to nark. 
The story is about a curious, contemporary strain of aimlessness. 
It has surfaced in the offspring of '60s types who have discovered, too late, that their freewheeling, dope-smoking life style wasn't exactly geared toward child rearing. 
Alienated youth is nothing new, but what's particularly scary about these kids is that they don't seem to be able to imagine anything better. 

   "River's Edge" is yet another example of the diversity being provided moviegoers by this country's ever-more-established independent film industry. 
It's a product of Hemdale Film Corp., financers of such good, tough-minded pictures as "Salvador" and "At Close Range," which didn't make much money -- as well as "The Terminator" and "Platoon," which did. 

   Though pictures shouldn't automatically get praised for being made on the cheap, director Tim Hunter deserves credit for what he's pulled off on a tight (under $2 million) budget. 
The picture has its rough spots -- the adults especially get short shrift -- but the rawness actually adds to the intensity. 

   The screenplay was written by young Neal Jimenez, as an assignment for a UCLA scriptwriting class. 
"Inspired" by a true-life story, he clearly empathizes with these kids and doesn't write them off as disaffected zombies. 
As the film follows them in the hours after their discovery of their friend's murder, it becomes apparent that the moral choice they have to make -- do they turn in their friend? -- disturbs them less than their numbness. 

   They realize that something is wrong when they look at the corpse of one of their friends and they don't cry. 
Yet they don't really have what we think of as a "sense of decency." 
They don't even bury her -- a point Mr. Hunter drives home by insistently turning the camera back onto her alabaster corpse lying bare on a deserted stretch of riverbank. 

   This is a tough picture to watch. 
The most sympathetic character in it is a whacked-out dope dealer and ex-thug biker called Feck, who lives with an inflatable sex-shop doll. 
He, too, had killed his girlfriend, and so he befriends the young murderer. 
But even among outcasts there is a generation gap. 
Feck (played by Dennis Hopper, of course, who does this kind of part so perfectly now he should probably stop) is dismayed when he finds out the kid, John, didn't commit a crime of passion. 
Feck, in his own way, is a warped hippie. 
For him, murder was the ultimate act of love. 
For John, murder was just another futile blow against boredom. 

   The young actors put everything they have into playing kids who put nothing into their lives. 
Crispin Glover, the nerdy father in "Back to the Future," is frightening as Layne, the strung-out teen desperado who's urgently seeking something. 
It's his idea not to report the murder. 
"It's kind of exciting," he tells his friends after they've seen the corpse. 
"I feel like, Chuck Norris, you know . . . we have to test our friendship." 

   He's wired, ready to pop, and his performance bounces all over the place. 
He seems so out of control it's painful to watch him, but exciting. 
At the center, though, is Keanu Reeves, a young Canadian actor who plays Matt, a quiet boy with an innate sense of decency. 
It must be innate because what he sees at home is a mother who can barely pull herself together, much less her kids. 
His little brother is a nerveless "Lord of the Flies" survivalist. 
At 12, he's "dying for a joint." 

   Mr. Hunter, a Harvard-educated screenwriter-turned-director, had previously made a couple of good teen pictures -- "Tex" and "Sylvester." 
After "Sylvester" flopped, however, he'd had it with movies about kids -- until he read Mr. Jimenez's script. 
"I felt people would criticize it for not being a more affirmative point of view," he said in an interview. 
"But I felt it was written with the passion of youth, in the dead heat of young inspiration. 
There isn't any good guy." 

   Like Mr. Hunter, all the main movers of this project fell into it reluctantly. 
Producers Sarah Pillsbury and Midge Sanford, producers of "Desperately Seeking Susan," were scouting around for material when an agent offered them the Jimenez script. 
"I heard what the script was about and I didn't even want to read it," said Ms. Sanford. 

   She did read it, though, and she and her partner bought it. 
Ms. Sanford lives in an upper-middle-class Santa Monica neighborhood with her literary-agent husband and 17-year-old son. 
Neither Ms. Sanford's son nor her 22-year-old daughter displays the kind of anomie that runs through "River's Edge," says their mother: "I don't know this kind of kids, but their voices were as real to me as kids' voices I know." 

   The producers sent the script to the major studios and got the usual: Nice writing, no deal. 
Then Hemdale got into the act; Island Pictures agreed to distribute. 
"River's Edge" opened two weeks ago in Los Angeles and New York, and will move to other cities over the next few weeks. 
It's powerful stuff. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
