ID: 180	RANK: 46	SCORE: 6.671645
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870423-0174 </DOCNO>
<HL> Los Angeles's Latest Cultural Innovation;
Showing and Selling Art in Restaurants
---
By Kathleen A. Hughes
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN>
<DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Bruce Corwin, president of Metropolitan Theaters Corp., and his wife, Toni, were lunching on walnut and chicken salad at Trumps, a trendy restaurant here, when Mr. Corwin looked up at the wall behind his wife and saw a piece of art he instantly liked. 

   "Wouldn't that be a great birthday present for you?" 
Mr. Corwin asked his wife. 
She agreed. 
But since the turquoise cement-and-glass relief already had been sold to another diner, the Corwins were directed to the studio of artist Laddie John Dill, where they paid $7,000 for another abstract work they liked even better. 

   Like Trumps, many chic restaurants around Los Angeles are becoming quasi-art galleries, both showing and selling paintings and sculptures. 
And artists, though they express some reservations about the practice, are embracing it. 

   The trend reflects surging interest in art in a city where gallery-hopping is difficult, because galleries are scattered over vast distances. 
It also reflects Angelenos' enthusiasm for dining out. 

   "People here don't have time to go to both restaurants and galleries," says Melisa Nicola, an owner of L.A. Nicola restaurant. 
"So they wind up going where their stomachs take them, and they buy art from restaurants." 
And since many of the restaurants that pioneered the changing art shows are among the city's most successful dining spots, they are being emulated by many new restaurants. 

   Typically, artists loan their works to restaurants through an art dealer in exchange for public exposure and possible sales. 
Restaurants, in turn, receive a steady stream of changing art shows for their walls, and some receive commissions on sales. 
Most exhibitions run two to four weeks and are ushered in by crowded opening parties that promote both the artist and the restaurant. 

   "It's an everybody-wins situation," says Marcia Weisman, a trustee of the city's Museum of Contemporary Art and a collector who bought a work at Trumps. 

   Indeed, artists are approaching restaurants with a zeal formerly reserved for galleries. 
Janet Karatz, the art consultant for Trumps, says she receives 30 packets of slides a week from artists hoping for shows at the restaurant. 

   Such interest among artists means that some restaurant art curators can afford to be almost as choosy in their selection processes as are gallery owners. 
Bruce Marder, owner of the West Beach Cafe, one of the first restaurants to host art shows, says he turns down a lot of young artists. 
"Basically, we try to deal with artists who already have gallery shows and are well represented," he says. 

   But some artists see drawbacks in restaurant shows. 
Mr. Dill, an established Los Angeles artist who has shown his work at two restaurants in addition to a major gallery, says restaurant viewers aren't the most alert group. 
"It's a passive way to look at art," Mr. Dill says. 
"It shouldn't replace the commitment to go out and see (art in) galleries." 

   The art in restaurants isn't always well displayed or lighted, artists say. 
Roy Fowler, a painter who usually shows his work at the Anne Plumb Gallery in New York, had his first restaurant show at the West Beach Cafe last summer. 
The opening drew more than 100 guests. 
"It was a lot of fun, and it was good exposure," Mr. Fowler says. 
"The only problem was that the maitre d' turned down the dimmer switch and it was dark." 

   Some restaurateurs who have acquired art for permanent display take a dim view of restaurant shows. 
"Great art is in great homes, great private collections or great galleries," says Peter Morton, the owner of celebrity-filled Mortons restaurant. 
"No great artist is going to get involved in a great show in a restaurant." 
Mortons owns works by established artists like Francis Bacon and David Hockney, but the art isn't for sale. 

   Michael McCarty, the owner of Michael's, another top-tier restaurant, has an $850,000 collection of art for permanent display, including works by Jasper Johns and Frank Stella. 
"Having someone come and change the art every couple of days is fine and dandy, but it's not the same statement," he says. 
"My collection requires a lot of money and taste and time." 

   Still, some restaurants, like the West Beach Cafe, have gained a reputation for showing, and offering for sale, the works of prominent artists like David Salle and Cindy Sherman. 

   Many restaurant owners, seeking not to offend their diners, limit the kinds of works in their shows. 
"If it's too dark and too crazy, I wouldn't use it," says Michel Richard, owner of Citrus, a popular restaurant that opened in January. 
Noel Decker, a managing director of Wave Restaurant &amp; Bar, says of his art selection: "No violence. 
No nudes. 
Just tasteful. 
We try to keep it light." 

   Some diners appear easily unnerved. 
Wave displayed a painting by artist Joe Davis that depicted a large man in jeans and a tank top swinging a mallet. 
"Customers said it was too physical for the restaurant, so it went back to the gallery," says Mr. Decker. 
At Restaurant Muse, a large painting by Kraig Cavanaugh of a hefty nude woman, titled "Object of Desire," has drawn criticism such as, "Oh, my goodness! 
How disgusting!" says Jane Poole, Muse's assistant manager. 

   But the West Beach Cafe, an artists' hangout, doesn't restrict itself to works that are tame or primarily decorative. 
"We've shown things that people thought were an assault to the dining experience," says Fred Hoffman, an art curator for the cafe and an owner of the HoffmanBormanGallery. 
For example, the cafe showed a painting by Georganne Deen depicting a decapitation. 

   Cigarette smoke, grease and even flying food put some of the art at risk. 
Michael's Mr. McCarty says "a big fat cat" recently knocked over a $35,000 wooden screen sculpture by artist Billy Al Bengston, causing "pretty serious" damage. 
Another diner with a cigarette came too close to a painting by Max Cole, leaving a charcoal stain. 
Most paintings, though, are under glass and rarely get damaged. 

   Many diners who buy art say their purchases are serendipitous. 
Jane Hurd, chief executive officer of Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles, was having lunch at L.A. Nicola when she saw a wooden sculpture. 
"I couldn't stop thinking about it, so I came back later and bought it," Ms. Hurd says; she won't disclose the price. 

   And Lynette Duensing, a video engineer, dined on a seafood salad with friends at the same restaurant before attending a crowded art opening in the adjoining Martini Lounge. 
Ms. Duensing liked a clay sculpture on a linen background by artist Gail Taylor, priced at $700, so she bought it on the spot. 
"It reminded me of South American art, and I have a big interest in that, " she says. 

   The two-week show also worked out well for Ms. Taylor, who sold eight pieces. 
"I'm trying to get another show in another restaurant this summer," she says. 
"The average person doesn't go to galleries, and I want to be a working artist." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
