ID: 223	RANK: 73	SCORE: 8.069630
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880302-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- In Concert: Franz From Beginning to End </HL>
<AUTHOR> Heidi Waleson </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Despite a half-empty hall at its eight concerts devoted to works written by Franz before he was 16, the 92nd-Street Y is pressing ahead optimistically with its 10-year chronological Schubertiade. 
After all, a half-empty auditorium is also a half-full auditorium, and the Y can look forward confidently to better and better works as, you might say, the composer matures. 
By 1997, the year of Schubert's centennial, all of his works will have been performed here in the order in which he wrote them or in which scholars say he wrote them. 

   But for now the Schubertiade is merchandising juvenilia for $17.50 a ticket to people raised on masterpieces. 
Omus Hirschbein, who is director of performing arts at the Y, is convinced the plan will be a winner. 
A series of concerts he presented in 1986 in conjunction with the Museum of Modern Art's "Vienna 1900" exhibit persuaded him that "if you put music into a cultural context, you can get people to come out and hear the wildest things." 

   The cultural context for Year One of the Schubertiade turned out to include a 48-page program book with very intelligent program notes and an essay by the Y's program annotator, Joseph Horowitz, as well as an exhibit about Schubert and his era in the adjoining art gallery, and a symposium about Schubert and songs, which had the best ticket sales of all the events. 
Listening to Schubert chronologically turned out to have cultural context all by itself, however. 

   There was something endearing about the way Schubert's first surviving composition, the Fantasy in G Major for Piano Duet (1810), plunged about from wild histrionics to tunes and back again with little regard for transitions or continuity. 
The earliest songs -- far from the delicately crafted Schubertian gems we know -- were whole scenes, set to long, melodramatic texts that revealed an adolescent relish for ghosts, death and funerals. 

   Then there was Schubert's first opera, "Der Spiegelritter" ("The Looking Glass Knight"), set to a thoroughly silly libretto, but with at least one delicious number, in which four ladies order a servant to bring the knight back safely. 
There were also string quartets, both Haydnesque and Mozartean, and with varying degrees of polish. 
And there were glimpses of the Schubert genius for melody and simple statement in some of the later songs. 

   Finally, there were examples of a form that later fell out of fashion, unaccompanied part songs for male chorus. 
They may not have been the most musically stimulating part of the programs, but they did evoke an era of good fellowship and home music-making, the Biedermier "gemutlichkeit" from which Schubert sprang. 

   Mr. Hirschbein didn't think this very early Schubert could stand on his own legs and considered putting works by Schubert's contemporaries on the programs to underscore the intellectual thrust of the concerts and to shore up the juvenilia. 
"But," he said, "Hermann {Prey} threw a fit, and I'm not going to go against him." 
Mr. Prey, the celebrated baritone, is the real begetter of the Schubertiade. 
He has been crusading for Schubert for 25 years, and launched an earlier Schubertiade in Vienna five years ago. 
He thinks that every Schubert work is a masterpiece, from that clumsy first Fantasy on. 
For him, strict chronology -- "to show the development of this child, who for me is a wonder" -- is of the essence. 
Mr. Prey is out to rescue Schubert from his image as a composer good only at art songs. 
"He belongs in this famous triangle of Beethoven, Haydn and Mozart. 
It should not be a triangle; it is a quadrangle!" 

   Mr. Hirschbein's interests are a little different. 
He is not so true a believer in the masterpiece value of every piece ("There are a lot of silly things"). 
And he says that at least one song and one string quartet may well be added to the standard repertoire because soprano Kaaren Erickson and the American String Quartet liked them so much when they performed them in the Y concerts. 

   At the same time, the Y is helping San Francisco, Houston and Los Angeles start their own Schubertiades. 
And all of the Y concerts are being recorded, with an eye to releasing one or two compact disks of material each year. 
The donors who supported this financially losing proposition are poised to renew, and next season there will be more symposiums, master classes with Hermann Prey, and possibly preconcert lectures. 
Year Two will be heavily vocal (Schubert wrote 150 songs in 1815). 
Major artists such as soprano Arleen Auger and pianist Alfred Brendel have been invited. 
Schubert's first complete opera, "Des Teufels Lustschloss" (translated enthusiastically, if somewhat inaccurately by Mr. Prey as "The Devil's Lust Castle"; it's actually "Pleasure Castle"), probably will have to be moved to a bigger space. 
Mr. Hirschbein expects the Schubert maniacs and the merely curious to be back in even greater force. 
"After this year," he says, "next year will be a piece of cake." 

   ---
   Ms. Waleson is a free-lance music writer in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
