ID: 294	RANK: 49	SCORE: 19.375368
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871102-0111 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Latest Fashion
For U.S. Spacemen
Is Still Up in the Air
---
The Shuttle Suit Is Old Hat;
Two Engineers at NASA
Vie to Create a Successor
---
By Laurie McGinley
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN>
<DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A new space race is on -- not to Mars, but to determine what the well-dressed astronaut will wear on strolls outside America's future space station. 

   The competition is between two spacesuits: One is the daring and exotic all-aluminum AX-5, which has what is known in space circles as the Tin Man. 
The other is the Zero Pre-breathe Mark 3, fashioned from the latest blend of metal and cloth. 
The Mark 3 is more in the traditional spacesuit image. 

   A restyled suit is necessary because changing space needs make the garb used on the space-shuttle flights as outdated as a Nehru jacket. 
"We need something new," says Hubert Vykukal, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration engineer who developed the AX-5. 
"Something more like a blue-collar work suit. 
A suit that you just put on and go out and do a job." 

   Spacesuits, which generally are used only for activities outside a spacecraft -- the suits worn inside the craft are called flight suits -- have run into problems in the past. 
When Edward White walked in space in 1965, his suit's cooling system malfunctioned, causing his visor to fog up. 
The beverage sack in Charles Duke's moon suit leaked in 1972, sending drops of orange drink floating around inside his helmet. 
Apollo crew members complained later that year of being unable to scratch their noses while they walked on the moon. 
NASA solved all these problems, the last by putting a strip of Velcro inside the astronauts' helmets so that they could relieve nose itches by simply moving their heads. 

   The goal now is to find the best attire for the space station scheduled to be launched around 1994. 
NASA plans to spend $300 million on the new suits, which will probably weigh 50 to 100 pounds more than the current, 100-pound shuttle suits. 

   Vying to become the Pierre Cardin of orbital haute couture are two NASA engineers: Mr. Vykukal of the agency's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, Calif., whose AX-5 is a drastic departure from the mostly soft suits that NASA has used before; and Joseph Kosmo of the Johnson Space Center here, whose Mark 3 has evolved from the agency's shuttle suits. 

   "The one who gets there first gets his name in the history books. 
There is no second place," says James Clougherty, a manager at ILC Dover Inc., a Delaware spacesuit manufacturer that is helping produce the Mark 3 suit. 

   The winner will be decided partly by a swim-off designed to simulate walking in outer space. 
In coming months, at least three astronauts here will take turns donning the AX-5 and being lowered by crane into a pool 25 feet deep. 
While underwater cameras record their movements, they will touch their toes, work in a mock-up of the shuttle's cargo bay and do underwater construction work. 
Early next year, they will do the same thing with the Mark 3. 
The water tests will measure the suits' flexibility and comfort. 

   Both camps agree that NASA needs a new Extravehicular Mobility Unit, known by most earthlings as a spacesuit, for use in Extravehicular Activities, or spacewalks. 
Space-station astronauts will be working in the vacuum of space three or four times a week for a total of 1,000 hours a year. 
"They'll be fixing solar sails, putting out scientific experiments and servicing satellites," says astronaut Sherwood Spring. 

   The new suit should provide greater protection against such potentially deadly hazards as radiation, micrometeoroids and man-made debris. 
"There's a lot of junk out there," notes Mr. Vykukal. 
The new suit also should be easier to maintain than the shuttle suit, which must be overhauled by ground technicians after being used three or four times. 

   Regardless of which suit is developed, certain features probably will be incorporated. 
Any suit, for example, is likely to have a "heads-up display" that would be activated by voice and provide the astronaut with important information, such as the suit's internal temperature, on a one-inch-square TV screen inside the helmet. 
And the suit probably will catch up with the Russians by having a rear hatch for easier donning and doffing. 

   The astronauts will have a big say in deciding which of the newly proposed suits will fly. 
So far, neither suit suits them, and for the same reason. 
NASA, at least for now, is insisting that both suits be designed to work at a pressure of about eight pounds per square inch, twice the pressure used in the current shuttle suits. 
But the astronauts worry that a higher-pressure suit could be as inflexible as an overinflated beach ball. 

   The big advantage of a high-pressure suit is that it would eliminate a time-consuming, cumbersome procedure known as pre-breathing. 
On the shuttle, to avoid getting the "bends," astronauts must either pre-breathe 100% oxygen for 3 1/2 hours before going outside, or lower the pressure of the shuttle for several hours and then breathe oxygen for 40 minutes. 
Either way, "it's rather boring," says James "Ox" van Hoften, a former astronaut who now is the manager of space programs at Bechtel National Inc. 

   The astronauts' worries about a higher-pressure suit center on the gloves, which they fear could swell up stiff as a frozen flounder, even stiffer than the unpopular shuttle gloves. 

   "Hand fatigue could be a real problem," warns astronaut Jerry Ross. 
"Everything in space is hand work. 
The only time you use your feet is to put them in foot restraints to prevent yourself from floating away." 
He and astronaut Spring, in a 1985 spacewalk that demonstrated techniques for space-station construction, ended up with sore and tired hands. 
"I felt like I'd been squeezing a rubber racketball," Mr. Ross recalls. 

   The designers admit they are having a hard time coming up with gloves that will work properly. 
Here at the Johnson Space Center, Mr. Kosmo pulls on a newly designed glove, thrusts it into a small vacuum chamber, and repeatedly opens and closes his hands. 
"We're progressing," he says with a sigh. 
"But it doesn't happen overnight." 

   The future of the space station still isn't certain, and astronauts could find themselves all dressed up with no place to go. 
Nevertheless, the spacesuit race is moving ahead. 
About half of the Johnson center's Mark 3 suit will be made of metal, but the shoulder and knee joints will be fabric. 
That, the suit's creators say, will make their outfit much more comfortable than the Ames center's all-hard suit. 
"Would you rather bump into the inside of a trash can or a balloon?" says ILC's Richard Ellis. 

   But Mr. Vykukal, who has been working on hard suits at Ames for two decades but has never had one fly, says he will use padding to make the inside of his AX-5 more user-friendly. 
Astronaut James Buchli, who has tried it on, says he is pleased by the suit's comfort and mobility. 
Moreover, Mr. Vykukal says a hard suit would be more durable, easier to manufacture and less sensitive to the high pressure than a soft suit. 

   Yet for all the debate about weighty design questions, some decisions come down to a simple question of appearance. 
"You can have something that works perfectly," says Mr. Vykukal, who has given his suit a sleeker, sci-fi look. 
"But if it doesn't look good, nobody will buy it." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
