ID: 221	RANK: 97	SCORE: 9.731295
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871222-0126 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
A Veto for Christmas</HL>
<DD> 12/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT
ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   It's amazing what the thought of missing Christmas can do to Congress. 
The same men and women who have fumed and postured for 12 months without passing a single appropriations bill -- not one -- have been working nights and Sundays to avoid spending the holiday taking calls from lobbyists and other Washington Grinches. 
Frankly, we wish President Reagan would keep them all in town. 
Maybe holiday blackmail would persuade more members that their budget process is a national joke. 

   To call what Congress will pass this week a budget is, of course, to be generous. 
A better name would be The Creature That Swallowed Congress. 
The 13 separate appropriations bills that the law says Congress must pass have again gone begging. 
Instead, for the second straight year, congressional leaders have lumped all of the government's appropriations -- and anything else it likes -- into a single $600 billion legislative ultimatum. 
Either President Reagan signs it, or the entire government shuts down. 

   The result is what every child would recognize as a giant game of chicken. 
Whoever blinks first loses -- and it has usually been the President. 
This year, however, Mr. Reagan has threatened veto, and so Congress has been squirming to try to pass a bill he'll sign. 
"It's just the nature of the beast," says House Speaker Jim Wright. 
"People of strong wills and powerful opinions sometimes play brinkmanship with one another." 

   Mr. Wright might have more credibility if he'd address the nature of Congress. 
His House colleagues, for example, have been holding the budget hostage to the Fairness Doctrine. 
Reinstating this outdated intrusion into private broadcasting -- which was dropped by the FCC earlier this year -- happens to be the hobbyhorse of Rep. John Dingell, a powerful Democratic committee chairman who likes twisting the arms of private business. 
Mr. Dingell doesn't have the votes to override a presidential veto, however, so he wants to make it veto-proof by dumping it into the budget package. 

   A similar showdown on aid to Nicaragua's Contras wasn't settled until Sunday. 
Though the Senate had passed a provision giving $9 million in humanitarian aid to the Contras, the left-liberal alliance that dominates the House Democratic Caucus had refused to allow any aid in the final bill. 
The President's veto threat -- and the Ortega brothers' recent attempts at truth-in-advertising -- finally forced the caucus to allow $8 million. 

   Central to all of these disputes is the fact that Congress has simply lost all self-control. 
The seniority system is toothless and party discipline doesn't exist. 
The only way the leadership can pass anything is to buy each member off. 
So the end-of-year budget package becomes a spending binge with something for everybody -- $500,000 for a highway bypass in Rep. Bob Carr's Michigan district; $8.5 million for high-tech anti-cancer equipment in Rep. Jerry Lewis's district; $350,000, sponsored by GOP Sen. Larry Pressler, to clean Mount Rushmore; and on and on. 
The vaunted "deficit-reduction package" is little more than tax hikes and accounting sleight of hand. 
Of course, the total government budget, including "entitlements" not covered by this legislation, exceeds $1 trillion. 

   The only way out of this mess is to restore discipline to the budget process. 
Our suggestion has been to give the President a line-item veto, and the idea is gaining supporters. 
Nine of the 13 presidential candidates also like it. 
Critics say a line-item veto would give the President the power to twist arms, but that's the point -- to restore the executive veto that the Framers knew was vital to check legislative excess. 

   White House chief of staff Howard Baker, who opposed the line-item while in the Senate, is apparently a convert. 
"I think the President is so victimized by the vagaries of Congress, Republicans and Democrats, about what to do with the budget, that it ceases being a coherent document," he said recently. 
"The President needs to be able to go inside the budget with a line-item veto, and in effect say, look, boys and girls, if you can't do this thing, I'll do it for you." 

   Mr. Baker seems to believe, however, that only a constitutional amendment can give the President such authority. 
We don't think so. 
Stephen Glazier recently wrote on this page that the Constitution (Article I, Section 7, Clauses 2 and 3) gives the President the power to veto every bill, order or resolution that Congress passes. 
The President, in short, may already have line-item power if he's willing to use it. 

   Mr. Reagan may yet allow Congress to go home for Christmas by signing the budget it sends him. 
But if he really wanted to give the taxpayers a Christmas present, he'd take out his pen and start finding things to veto. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
