ID: 124	RANK: 12	SCORE: 16.870516
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870316-0082 </DOCNO>
<HL> Caesars Rejects
Sosnoff's Bid
As 'Inadequate'
---
Gambling Concern Studies
Possible Restructuring,
Sale to a Friendly Suitor
---
By Laurie P. Cohen and Roy J. Harris Jr.
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/16/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CAW ATL UAL GNG
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Caesars World Inc. is exploring restructuring or the sale of the company to a friendly suitor after rejecting Martin T. Sosnoff's $28-a-share tender offer for the gambling concern as "inadequate." 

   A source familiar with Caesars said that the primary options that the Los Angeles-based company and its financial advisers are studying are a management-sponsored leveraged buyout or a major stock buyback. 

   The suggestion that competing bidders might be sought spurred an increase in the price of Caesars shares. 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday, Caesars World stock closed at $29.375 a share, up $1.375, on heavy volume. 

   But Caesars, which owns and operates the Caesars Palace luxury hotel-casino in Las Vegas, Nev., and Caesars New Jersey in Atlantic City, declined to say whether it had already begun talks with other parties about a competing offer. 

   In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing Friday, the company said that the mention of possible suitors "might jeopardize the continuation of any discussions or negotiations that the company may conduct." 

   In New York, Mr. Sosnoff, Caesars' largest shareholder, said he still seeks a "friendly acquisition" of the company despite its rejection of his offer. 
Mr. Sosnoff said he believes his offer is fair to all of the company's shareholders and represents a significant premium over recent and historic prices for the company's shares. 

   Mr. Sosnoff is understood to be considering the possibility of increasing his bid for Caesars. 
"He feels he has access to the means to up the ante," said an individual familiar with Mr. Sosnoff's bid for Caesars. 
"Whether he will is a matter of further study for him." 

   In rejecting Mr. Sosnoff's bid for the 25.9 million Caesars common shares he doesn't already own, Caesars cited "uncertainties" in the offer, including the New York money manager's ability to finance the bid and to win Nevada and New Jersey regulatory approval allowing him to become a casino operator. 

   Caesars said in the SEC filing that Mr. Sosnoff's bid "raises serious legal questions under the federal securities law," but didn't elaborate. 
The company said its financial adviser, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., issued a written opinion concurring with its decision to spurn Mr. Sosnoff's bid. 

   Some stock analysts and Wall Street traders speculated that other possible buyers for Caesars might include UAL Inc., the Chicago-based parent of United Airlines, New York real estate developer Donald Trump, investor Kirk Kerkorian and Las Vegas-based Golden Nugget Inc. 

   But Mr. Kerkorian has denied that he is interested in Caesars and a source close to Mr. Trump said the developer has "zero interest" in the company. 
UAL officials weren't available to comment, but a source familiar with the company said that while UAL "could be interested," it "would take a long time and be a big hassle (for UAL) to get licenses" to own and operate casinos in New Jersey and Nevada. 

   Golden Nugget, which is already licensed to own and operate casinos in both states, has plenty of available cash if it wishes to make an offer for Caesars. 
While officials of the hotel and casino concern weren't available to comment, sources familiar with Caesars said that the company's management isn't likely to accept a Golden Nugget bid. 
"They'd rather have Sosnoff than Golden Nugget," said one of the sources, adding that Golden Nugget's chairman, Steve Wynn, "would probably fire everyone in a month," and that Caesars' chairman, Henry Gluck, "is smart enough to know that." 

   Neither Mr. Gluck nor any of Caesars' advisers have had any conversations with Mr. Sosnoff or his representatives since last Monday, sources said. 
But Mr. Gluck may be reeling from his first contact with Mr. Sosnoff as a bidder for Caesars March 8. 

   According to one source, Mr. Sosnoff first notified Mr. Gluck in a phone call to Caesars Palace that a tender offer was to be announced in a newspaper advertisement last Monday morning. 
When the investor reached Mr. Gluck by telling a receptionist that the call was urgent, the Caesars chairman was on the dais at a televised celebration of the 20th anniversary of Caesars Palace, which was about to begin. 

   The source said that the surprised Mr. Gluck is understood to have responded, "Marty, I always knew you'd come after me some time." 

   Separately, Caesars' lawyers appeared in federal court in Miami Friday to argue that a suit Mr. Sosnoff filed against the company should be considered instead in Los Angeles. 
As previously reported, Mr. Sosnoff's complaint, filed last Monday, alleges that Caesars and its directors breached their fiduciary duty to shareholders by approving anti-takeover measures last year. 
A decision on the matter is expected later this week. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
