ID: 124	RANK: 14	SCORE: 16.381536
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870813-0083 </DOCNO>
<HL> Caesars World Recapitalization Plan
Is Rejected by New Jersey Commission
---
By David J. Jefferson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CAW CJN
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The New Jersey Casino Control Commission rejected Caesars World Inc.'s proposed $960 million recapitalization, saying it "lacks any clear business purpose." 

   Commission Chairman Walter N. Read said he had "very real doubt about the financial responsibility of the proposal," which Caesars designed earlier this year to thwart a takeover attempt by New York investor Martin T. Sosnoff. 
Mr. Sosnoff in June dropped a sweetened $35-a-share bid for the company and said he couldn't justify the cost of continuing the $1.11 billion takeover effort. 
He couldn't be reached yesterday to comment on the ruling. 

   The recapitalization plan, which calls for Caesars' shareholders to receive a one-time cash dividend of $26.25 a share and stock in the reconstituted company, was approved by shareholders last month. 

   Mr. Read said the plan will burden Caesars with "staggering debt." 
He added that Caesars' management "proposes to pile on this financial burden to pay shareholders a huge dividend to foster their approval of proposals, which will greatly enrich and permanently entrench present corporate officials." 

   Los Angeles-based Caesars, operator of the Caesars Palace hotel-casino in Las Vegas, Nev., and Caesars Atlantic City hotel-casino in New Jersey, said it was "disappointed" with the commission's ruling, but declined to comment further. 
The company is awaiting an Aug. 20 ruling from the Nevada Gaming Commission on the recapitalization plan. 

   The New Jersey commission, which has regulatory authority over the state's gambling operations and is empowered to issue and revoke gambling licenses, voted 4-1 against the plan. 
A favorable vote by at least four commissioners was required for approval of the Caesars plan. 

   Commissioner Valerie H. Armstrong cast the only vote in support of the plan, saying Caesars had provided sufficient evidence that it wouldn't buckle under the strain of the $960 million of new debt required to finance the recapitalization. 

   After the commission's action, one Wall Street executive suggested that Caesars might sell its New Jersey operations, using proceeds to help recapitalize the company -- a move that would be similar to one by Los Angeles-based Hilton Hotels Corp. 
After New Jersey in 1985 denied Hilton a casino license for its $300 million Atlantic City hotel, it sold the property to New York real estate developer Donald Trump. 

   Mr. Sosnoff had dropped his bid one week after receiving an unfavorable federal court ruling. 
In June, a federal judge in Los Angeles enjoined him from continuing his tender offer on the ground that it violated a Federal Reserve Board rule governing the financing of corporate takeovers. 

   Still, Mr. Read rejected Caesars' claim that it needed to proceed with the recapitalization even after Mr. Sosnoff dropped his bid. 
"It is unclear why another takeover effort would be inevitable, considering the results of the last such effort and the regulatory hurdles involved," Mr. Read said. 
He also said it wasn't clear "why a takeover would necessarily be disadvantageous to the stockholders if the bidder received regulatory approvals." 

   In issuing its ruling, the commission attempted to distinguish the Caesars plan from a similar $2.6 billion recapitalization of Holiday Corp. approved by the commission in April. 
Memphis, Tenn.-based Holiday, a hotel and gambling concern, proposed its plan last November when it was rumored to be a takeover target. 

   Mr. Read described the Holiday plan as essentially "an acceleration" of a long-term strategy to dispose of assets and move toward managing properties instead of owning them. 
But he said that Caesars recapitalization plan would replace an existing policy of pursuing internal growth and expansion. 
He added that Caesars proposes to "abandon a prudent, successful corporate strategy for an imprudent, risky one." 
The company's equity, he added, would become "a lowly foothill beneath its Alpine debt." 

   Securities analysts who follow the gambling industry were surprised by the New Jersey commission's action. 
And one said he expects Caesars to appeal the ruling. 

   "It's palpably absurd, especially because this is the commission" that approved the Holiday Corp. plan, said Steven Eisenberg, an analyst with Bear, Stearns &amp; Co. "Caesars has adequately demonstrated that its cash flows are such that it won't have to sell one asset, and can still generate cash to service the debt. 
That suggests the company is very, very strong," Mr. Eisenberg said. 

   The New Jersey action came after the close of the stock market yesterday. 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Caesars shares closed at $35.125, off 12.5 cents. 

   Caesars operates its Atlantic City hotel-casino through an 86.6%-owned subsidiary, Caesars New Jersey Inc. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
