ID: 124	RANK: 33	SCORE: 14.317476
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870406-0042 </DOCNO>
<HL> Caesars World
Unveils Proposal
To Recapitalize
---
Casino Hotel Owner Calls
Plan Better for Holders
Than Bid of $28 a Share
---
By David B. Hilder
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CAW ATL
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO) </IN>
<DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Caesars World Inc., responding to a $28-a-share bid by investor Martin Sosnoff, unveiled a recapitalization plan in which it will pay a one-time cash dividend of $25 a share and incur about $1 billion of new debt. 

   The owner of casino hotels said it believes the plan is better for shareholders than Mr. Sosnoff's tender offer because it will allow holders to retain their shares and "their equity participation in the company's future growth." 

   However, the dividend payment and retirement of $222.5 million of existing debt would wipe out Caesars's shareholders equity and would result in a negative net worth -- or assets minus liabilities -- of about $700 million. 

   Caesars said its investment bankers, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Bear, Stearns &amp; Co. have advised that the company would have sufficient funds for operating cash and capital requirements. 
Caesars also said it expects to continue to receive an unqualified opinion from its outside auditors. 

   After the proposed recapitalization, Caesars said net income for the fiscal year ending July 31, 1988, would be about $28.7 million, or 76 cents a share, based on a projected 37.8 million common shares and equivalent shares outstanding. 
In fiscal 1986, Caesars had net of $41 million, or $1.36 a share. 
The concern didn't project earnings for the current fiscal year. 

   The plan is subject to approval by shareholders and gambling regulators in Nevada and New Jersey. 
Caesars said it will schedule a special shareholder meeting in June to vote on the recapitalization plan. 
Record and payment dates for the dividend would be set later. 

   Caesars said the $1 billion in new debt will include $200 million in bank borrowings and $800 million of debt securities to be sold by Drexel. 
The securities are expected to be of the high-yield, low-rated or unrated variety known as junk bonds. 

   Caesars said Drexel has advised that "based on customary conditions, it is highly confident that it can arrange the entire financing necessary to consummate the recapitalization." 

   Drexel's participation in the transaction and its issuance of its usual "highly confident" letter indicates that the firm is continuing its strong presence in the junk bond market despite government investigations into its activities as part of the widening insider-trading probe. 

   In New York, Mr. Sosnoff described Caesars's offer as "conjectural," in terms of its value. 
"We don't know what the financial terms will be at the point at which Drexel raises the capital for the deal," Mr. Sosnoff said. 
If, for example, interest rates for the high-yield securities rise 100 basis points in the next three months, Caesars's projections of earnings could be slashed by a third, he said. 

   The recapitalization plan also would result in substantial dilution to shareholders, Mr. Sosnoff contended. 
"A management that owned less than 1% is suddenly being given a substantially higher stake in the company. 
That can't be good news for existing shareholders," he said. 

   Mr. Sosnoff said he is beginning talks with new joint venture partners to create a new financial package. 
In any case, his $28-a-share offer for Caesars "isn't the last word." 
Last week, the investor said Pratt Hotel Corp. and Southmark Corp. dropped their offer to join his $28 bid to acquire Caesars. 

   Henry Gluck, chairman and chief executive officer of Caesars, said the recapitalization plan "will not require the sale of assets or the layoff of any employees. 
We are going to have positive earnings from operations." 

   Under the recapitalization, Caesars shareholders would receive cash later than under Mr. Sosnoff's offer, and would hold shares in a riskier, debt-laden company. 

   Mr. Gluck said he believes the plan is "financially superior" to Mr. Sosnoff's $725.2 million offer and projected that by 1992, Caesars would retire $267 million of the new debt and would have net income of $86.2 million. 

   But in an interview yesterday, Mr. Gluck declined to predict the market value of Caesars's shares after the recapitalization. 
"We won't really know until tomorrow," Mr. Gluck said, referring to the opening of trading in Caesars today. 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Caesars closed Friday at $29.25 a share, up 25 cents. 
As of Jan. 31, the company's equity was $298.8 million. 

   Real estate developer Donald Trump, who previously forced Holiday Corp. into a debt-heavy recapitalization, said that Caesars's plan is "a good deal for stockholders but a bad deal for the company." 

   Mr. Trump, who controls four Atlantic City, N.J., casinos, said he believes that several gambling industry companies have such high debt service costs that they are failing to invest in their primary businesses. 

   Under the plan, Caesars also would change its state of incorporation to Delaware from Florida and institute certain anti-takeover provisions. 

   Among them would be a so-called "fair price" provision requiring approval by an 80% majority of shares for transactions in which a stockholder has a stake of 15% or more. 
Shares held by the holders of 15% or more wouldn't count toward the 80% requirement. 
Directors, however, could waive the requirement. 

   The move to Delaware incorporation, Mr. Gluck said, is motivated partly by a state law there allowing companies to limit the personal liability of directors for damages in potential lawsuits by holders. 

   In addition, the recapitalization would grant 1.5 million common shares to 40 top managers at Caesars. 
Ownership rights would vest over a period of eight years. 
And an additional 1.5 million shares would be reserved for future grants to key managers and employees. 

   "The company's management team is facing substantial challenges as we face paying off the approximately $1 billion of debt which we are incurring in connection with the recapitalization," Mr. Gluck said, adding that the share grants are intended to retain managers and provide incentives for them. 

   Caesars said it is likely that the $25 dividend would be taxed at ordinary income rates, but only to the extent of the company's total profits this year through July 31, 1987, which it estimated would be about $7 a share. 
The remaining amount of the dividend would reduce a holder's tax basis in the shares and wouldn't be taxable, unless it exceeded the amount of the tax basis, the company said. 
Any excess over the tax basis would be taxed at capital gains rates, Caesars said. 

   However, Caesars said that the Internal Revenue Service might challenge certain aspects of the tax treatment of the recapitalization. 
Caesars also said it doesn't intend to seek a ruling from the IRS on tax consequences of the dividend. 

   Caesars said holders who want to assure themselves of capital-gains tax treatment should sell their shares before the recapitalization takes effect. 

   In early March, Mr. Sosnoff launched the $725.2 million tender offer for the 86.4% of Caesars shares that he doesn't already own. 
Caesars's directors urged holders to reject the offer, which expires 12:01 a.m. EDT on May 16. 

   ---
   Udayan Gupta in New York contributed to this article. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
