ID: 124	RANK: 37	SCORE: 14.097467
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870421-0044 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Caesars World's Gluck Keeps Poker Face
---
By David J. Jefferson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CAW
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Henry Gluck was in Las Vegas hosting a lavish, televised celebration of the 20th anniversary of Caesars Palace hotel-casino last month when he first learned of investor Martin T. Sosnoff's hostile tender offer for his company. 

   The Caesars World Inc. chairman didn't want to spoil the fun or tip off anyone that there was serious business to deal with. 
So instead of walking off the banquet hall platform to take telephone calls from Mr. Sosnoff and Caesars officials, the tuxedo-clad, normally reserved chief executive officer crawled on his hands and knees behind the dais to get to a phone. 
"The people around me must have thought I had a weak bladder," he jokes. 

   Fighting off an unfriendly takeover bid while trying to convince colleagues, customers and shareholders that a company is still alive and well can be a difficult balancing act for a chief executive. 
But Mr. Gluck is determined not to let the battle bring Caesars World to its knees. 

   The effort to maintain a focus on ongoing operations while dealing with the tender offer has been a test of stamina for the 58-year-old Mr. Gluck. 
To ward off Mr. Sosnoff's offer -- initially $28 a share, later sweetened to $32 a share, or $931.2 million -- Los Angeles-based Caesars unveiled a $1 billion recapitalization plan that would pay holders a one-time dividend of $25 a share and give them stock in the recapitalized company. 

   The plan was announced the day before the heavily publicized middleweight boxing match between Sugar Ray Leonard and Marvin Hagler in the parking lot at Caesars Palace -- by far the company's biggest special event of the year. 
The timing may not have been coincidental. 

   "I felt if we had something meaningful to offer shareholders, we should present it when there was more publicity and notoriety about Caesars than any other time," Mr. Gluck says. 

   That wasn't an easy task. 
Mr. Gluck had a marathon week leading up to the Monday, April 6, fight. 
He led a three-day corporate strategic planning meeting, attended the Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. junk bond conference in Beverly Hills, Calif., and juggled meetings in between with Caesars' financial advisers. 
(Mr. Gluck also had been scheduled to give a speech at the bond conference, but bowed out because "the company I had planned to talk about might be a different-looking company soon.") 

   To complicate things, Mr. Gluck says, he was confronted with "the most unbelievable last-minute logistics for the fight," including a call from a Hollywood executive asking for ringside seats for his studio's 30 biggest stars as part of a promotional campaign. 
Sorry, Mr. Gluck responded. 

   The weekend was even more intense. 
Mr. Gluck began it in Los Angeles with an all-day meeting with lawyers Saturday, traveled to New York for an emergency powwow with Caesars directors to present the recapitalization plan, did telephone interviews with financial reporters, then flew back to Las Vegas late Sunday night to do a television interview to promote the Leonard-Hagler match. 

   By then, Mr. Gluck had been working nonstop for almost 24 hours, and the fatigue was beginning to show. 
He considered not doing the televison spot, but Caesars' public relations director convinced Mr. Gluck it was important to show he was in command of the situation; the executive was even persuaded to let a celebrity makeup artist hide the circles under his eyes in time for the 11 p.m. news. 

   Working long hours is nothing new for Mr. Gluck, who says he's never been able to balance his career with personal pursuits very well. 
"I'm uncomfortable taking a lot of time off work," he says. 

   But Mr. Gluck did force himself to take one big chunk of time off during his career. 
He was a millionaire at age 43 when he retired as president of Monogram Industries Inc., a Los Angeles-based industrial products conglomerate, in 1973. 
"I'd worked all my life and I'd never stopped to smell the flowers," says Mr. Gluck, who began his career holding down jobs as a waiter and launching a small advertising specialty business while he was a student at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. 

   In the 10 years between Monogram and Caesars World, Mr. Gluck says he did almost everything he intended to do when he retired, including learning to ski, improving his tennis game, taking extended vacations to Europe with his wife and children, and serving on various educational committees. 
His one regret is that he never finished writing a satirical novel about business, although he still has the manuscript and hopes to complete it someday. 

   Mr. Gluck initially was seen as an odd choice to head Caesars, although he had been a director of the gambling concern for a year. 
The company was in its worst financial shape ever, and was reeling from bad publicity after its co-founders, brothers Clifford and Stuart Perlman, were found unsuitable to hold a New Jersey gambling license because of alleged business dealings with associates of organized crime. 

   Mr. Gluck was approached for the job because of his good reputation in the business community and strong ties with banks and other financial institutions. 
He quickly shook up the company by firing many executives; others quit in protest at what they viewed as Mr. Gluck's meddling. 
The executive also restructured the company's finances. 

   Despite his initial unease about being in the gambling business, Mr. Gluck appears to enjoy it thoroughly now. 
For a few hours after the television interview on the eve of the Leonard-Hagler match, and despite his being up for 26 hours, Mr. Gluck seemed almost rejuvenated as he strolled the casino floor greeting the high rollers and celebrities in town for the big fight. 

   "The toughest challenge in all of this . . . is to run the company the way it's been running," he says. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
