ID: 124	RANK: 65	SCORE: 11.922595
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871016-0150 </DOCNO>
<HL> Fight Over Fights: Donald Trump
Vies for Las Vegas's Boxing Crown
---
By Hal Lancaster
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/16/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CAW
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO) </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In command central, his spacious Trump Tower office high in the sky over Manhattan's posh Fifth Avenue, Donald J. Trump is plotting the overthrow of Las Vegas. 

   For years, that desert resort town was the undisputed boxing capital of the world. 
Casino operators there routinely outbid other sites for big fights, confident that they would recoup their costs from the high-rolling gamblers and fight fans those spectacles attracted. 

   But that was before Mr. Trump, the flamboyant New York businessman-developer, started plastering his name on Atlantic City hotel-casinos. 
If boxing played well in the Nevada desert, he reasoned, it would flourish along the New Jersey shore. 

   Tonight, for example, Mr. Trump is staging his second big fight in recent months, a heavyweight championship match between Mike Tyson and Tyrell Biggs. 
To get it, he outbid Las Vegas's Caesars Palace, once the unquestioned king of title fights, by a wide margin. 

   "Donald tells us he wants to do every big fight," says Seth Abraham, senior vice president of Home Box Office, the Time Inc. cable-television service that broadcasts many big fights. 
Mr. Abraham takes him at his word: "He's aggressive, ambitious, he has a feeling for publicity and a checkbook the size of the Nabila," a 286-foot yacht Mr. Trump recently bought. 

   If this fight over fights were one of promoter Don King's matches, he might bill it the "Shootout in Glitter Gulch." 
In one corner: Atlantic City, the cocky young challenger. 
"I don't believe Las Vegas will be able to compete," Mr. Trump says with an air of certainty. 

   In the other corner: Las Vegas, the game but aging champion. 
"We seem to survive despite the competition," says Bob Halloran, president of Caesars World Sports, which books sporting events for Caesars Palace. 

   But hasn't the competition intensified now that the well-heeled Mr. Trump has stepped forward? 
"He stepped forward in the USFL, too," Mr. Halloran snorts, referring to Mr. Trump's investment in the ill-fated football league. 

   The battle means much to these rival resort towns. 
"Boxing is a one-of-a-kind event," says Sig Rogich, president of R&amp;R Advertising in Las Vegas and a Nevada boxing commissioner. 
"You can come right in and go to a world championship event, it doesn't take a lot of space and it's easy to promote." 

   Consider the economic impact of the Sugar Ray Leonard-Marvin Hagler match at Caesars Palace earlier this year. 
That one fight generated more than $88 million of visitor spending in just three days, the Las Vegas Convention Authority estimates. 

   And that figure doesn't include gambling revenue. 
Casinos are flush with high rollers when a big fight comes to town, enabling them to raise minimum table bets sky-high. 
In Atlantic City, it took $100 to elbow into a Trump Plaza craps game the night of the Michael Spinks-Gerry Cooney heavyweight fight in June. 
Many blackjack tables had a minimum bet of $500. 
The result: The amounts wagered that Monday night exceeded $7 million, up from about $1.5 million for an average Monday. 

   Moreover, "boxing on this high level reaches beyond any showroom or theater-type entertainment," says Mark G. Etess, Trump Plaza's executive vice president. 
"We get millions and millions of dollars of additional publicity and exposure." 

   That's critical for the New Jersey resort town, which to date has relied heavily on "daytrippers," mostly small-time players who bus in from nearby New York or Philadelphia for a day. 
Mr. Trump hopes boxing will help give his Atlantic City holdings (which include the Trump Plaza and Trump Castle hotel-casinos) an image as a haven for high-rolling glitterati, much as it did for Caesars, a subsidiary of Caesars World Inc., and the Las Vegas Hilton, a unit of Hilton Hotels Corp. 

   Each of the two cities brings some big advantages -- and disadvantages -- to the fray. 
For most of the year, Las Vegas holds a decided edge in weather. 
But that advantage shifts to Atlantic City in the summer, when Las Vegas's outdoor venues are plagued by searing heat. 
The Hilton holds its big fights in a temporary, parking-lot arena that can seat up to 10,000; Caesars' permanent outdoor facility can hold up to 15,000. 

   Mr. Trump, meanwhile, has access to Atlantic City's enclosed, air-conditioned Convention Hall, which is connected to his Trump Plaza. 
Eventually he will be able to use any of three enclosed arenas, ranging in seating capacity from 3,500 to 22,000. 

   Overall, Mr. Trump considers his boxing facilities superior to Las Vegas's makeshift stadiums, and many others agree. 
With Convention Hall, notes HBO's Mr. Abraham, Mr. Trump "can go 12 months of the year." 
Boxing promoter Bob Arum adds that with three sites of varied size, Mr. Trump "can pick and choose what venue he wants to use." 

   Mr. Trump argues that Atlantic City has an advantage in location. 
He notes that the nation's most dense population corridor and its biggest media center are near Atlantic City. 

   Las Vegas, though, holds a decided edge in rooms, with nearly 43,000 in its major hotels, compared with about 7,000 in Atlantic City. 
But at least for Mr. Trump, that might not be a serious problem much longer. 
With his acquisition of Resorts International, which is building the 1,200-room Taj Mahal Hotel and Casino, Mr. Trump will have 3,000 rooms at his disposal by the end of next year. 

   Mr. Trump also has deep pockets -- a personal fortune of up to $3 billion, by various estimates -- and a willingness to spend freely. 
He paid $2 million for the right to stage the Spinks-Cooney fight, and $3.5 million for tonight's Tyson-Biggs match. 
"We made a strong bid (for Tyson-Biggs), and he outbid us drastically," says Caesars' Mr. Halloran. 

   Such hefty bidding is generating calls from interested promoters, says Mr. Etess of Trump Plaza. 
"Everyone realizes we can be a player in any fight Donald chooses." 
Mr. Trump says he plans to bid on a Tyson-Spinks fight, should there be one, and any bouts involving Messrs. 
Leonard or Hagler. 

   Mr. Halloran believes that promoters will continue to do business where they have had past success. 
"He's done one fight," he says of Mr. Trump. 
"We've done 89 or 90." 
But Mr. Trump has worked hard to ingratiate himself with important promoters, like Mr. King. 

   Mr. Trump's efforts helped the controversial Mr. King get a license to promote fights in New Jersey. 
Also, Mr. King marvels, "he put his private jet at my disposal," and he offered to advise the promoter on real-estate investments and financing. 
While not saying that he prefers to promote fights in Atlantic City, Mr. King allows that "with Donald Trump, everything is first-class." 

   So impressed was the bombastic Mr. King, he even coined a word to describe Mr. Trump: telesynergistic. 
Mr. King offers this definition: "Progress ingeniously planned by geometric progression, the capability to translate dreams into living reality in minimal time at mega-profits." 

   Can Las Vegas fight back against a telesynergistic billionaire? 
It won't be easy, says Mr. Arum, the promoter. 
"None of the Las Vegas casinos is as strong individually as he is, and they can't count on the support of other casinos," he says. 
In the past, he says, host casinos like Caesars hogged the best tickets and parking for their customers, leaving other casinos dissatisfied. 
Mr. Arum also argues that efforts earlier this year to avert a hostile takeover distracted Caesars' management from avid pursuit of boxing shows, a contention Mr. Halloran vigorously denies. 

   Still, there are signs of concern in Las Vegas about Mr. Trump's inroads. 
Gambling and boxing sources indicate that Las Vegas interests have tried to sell Mr. Trump a casino there in order to assure the city a continuing piece of the boxing pie. 
"I'm not interested in Las Vegas at this time," Mr. Trump says curtly. 

   Mr. Halloran argues that Las Vegas will continue to get its share of fights: Mr. Trump "can't do every fight," he says. 

   No, Mr. Trump concedes, but "we'll get more and better fights." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
