ID: 124	RANK: 78	SCORE: 11.182772
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870310-0065 </DOCNO>
<HL> Gloomy Outlook for New Jersey Casinos
Seems Likely to Prompt More Takeovers
---
By Francine Schwadel and Julie Amparano
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ELS BLY RT.A CAW CJN PRAT HIA GNG RAM WBB HIA
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The gambling industry in Atlantic City, N.J., may be down on its luck for the next couple of years. 
That gloomy outlook is fueling a rash of casino sales that seems likely to continue for some time. 

   "Atlantic City is going to see further consolidation," predicts Marvin B. Roffman, a gambling-industry analyst at Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. Adds Harold L. Vogel, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, "The weak casinos will probably be taken over by someone already licensed" to do business in Atlantic City. 

   Yesterday, holders of most of the voting stock of Resorts International Inc. accepted Donald Trump's $101 million bid for control of Resorts, which operates casinos in Atlantic City and the Bahamas. 
And, as previously reported, New York investor Martin T. Sosnoff is bidding to acquire Caesars World Inc., which operates casinos in Atlantic City and Las Vegas, Nev. 

   Also, as previously reported, Bally Manufacturing Corp. bought Golden Nugget Inc.'s Atlantic City casino, apparently to thwart a takeover threat. 

   The Resorts transaction was prompted by the death last April of James M. Crosby, who founded the company and was its chairman. 
And Mr. Sosnoff has been accumulating Caesars shares for some time. 

   But current economic conditions of the Atlantic City gambling market make purchases of existing casinos much more attractive than building new ones. 

   Instead of increasing the competition for gamblers' dollars by building new casinos, "companies that want to expand might find it more advantageous to buy another facility," says Saul F. Leonard, who follows the hotel and casino industry for Laventhol &amp; Horwath, an accounting firm. 

   Atlantic City casinos recently experienced increased competition when Donald Trump entered the market with Trump Plaza and Trump's Castle. 
And overall growth in gambling revenue has been sapped even as Mr. Trump's new properties have siphoned off much of the city's new business. 

   In 1984, for example, the total gross win for all Atlantic City casinos rose 10.2% from the prior year. 
But in 1985 the rise was only 9.6%, and by 1986 the rate of increase had eased to 6.7%, according to New Jersey Casino Control Commission data. 

   Moreover, growth of gaming revenue in Atlantic City continues to slow as big casino expansions are under way. 
Analysts fear this trend will create an overcapacity problem that will depress casino profits for the next two years. 

   The new facilities include the Showboat Hotel, Casino &amp; Bowling Center, expected to open soon; an expansion of the Tropicana Hotel &amp; Casino owned by Ramada Inns Inc.; and the Taj Mahal, a $525 million Resorts property still under construction that is being billed as the world's largest casino. 

   Given the slow-growth environment and the glut of casino space, Janney Montgomery Scott's Mr. Roffman predicts, "The pie will be cut in thinner slices." 

   Adding pressure is a marketing dilemma peculiar to Atlantic City. 
With its proximity to such population centers as New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington, the Atlantic City gambling experience has been dominated by day-trippers. 
Nevertheless, hotel rooms have been in short supply, and the average "house win" per guest has been suppressed because, in contrast to Las Vegas, stays are relatively brief. 

   "It's easier for people in secondary markets like Boston to fly to Las Vegas than it is (for them) to get to Atlantic City," says H. Steven Norton, executive vice president of Resorts. 
He believes better airline service is crucial to the long-term success of gambling in Atlantic City. 

   Companies interested in entering the Atlantic City market also face high construction and land costs as well as what many industry executive consider "hostile" regulators. 
Two years ago, Hilton Hotels Corp. was denied a license by the New Jersey Casino Control Commission because several of its officials failed to demonstrate what the commissioners considered "good character and integrity." 

   The Bass brothers of Texas dropped plans to enter the market because of extensive disclosure requirements. 
Recently, Stephen A. Wynn, president of Golden Nugget, opted to abandon the Atlantic City market for Las Vegas, partly because of what sources describe as his frustration with regulators. 

   Potential buyers include Denver oilman Marvin Davis, according to a gambling-industry source. 
The source, who was close to the Resort negotiations, said Mr. Davis made an unsuccessful bid for Resorts. 
Lee Solters, a spokesman for Mr. Davis, declined to discuss possibilities in Atlantic City. 

   In addition, Jack E. Pratt Sr., chairman of Dallas-based Pratt Hotel Corp., might still be interested in buying a casino after losing out in the Resorts bidding war. 
Mr. Pratt couldn't be reached for comment. 

   In the long run, however, the outlook for Atlantic City seems brighter. 
Better airline service, which could attract new gamblers, is expected once more hotel rooms are built. 
A railroad line connecting Atlantic City with Philadelphia is under construction. 
And a convention center, aimed at attracting visitors, is in the planning stages. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
