ID: 162	RANK: 8	SCORE: 26.508718
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880610-0144 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sewage Identified As Main Threat To Egypt's Sphinx --- Investigation After Chunk Fell From Ancient Statue Blames Village, Hotel </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> MDEST </CO>
<IN> ENV </IN>
<DATELINE> GIZA PLATEAU, Egypt (AP)  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Specialists investigating why the Sphinx is crumbling say the culprit is sewage from a tacky tourist village and a hotel favored by the rich and famous. 

   Cries of alarm were raised in early February, after a chunk of limestone fell from the 4,500-year-old statue's right shoulder. 
Suddenly, salt oozing through the limestone statue and previously ignored cracks in its pharaoh's face and lion's body were seen as evidence the monument was near collapse. 

   A committee of specialists from Egypt, France, West Germany and Italy probed, scraped and tested the stone for four months to see what is happening to one of the world's best-known ancient monuments. 

   The answer is quickened decay, and the reason is sewage, said Zahi Hawass, an Egyptologist and director general of the pyramids area where the Sphinx has crouched since the Old Kingdom. 

   Mr. Hawass blamed sewage water flowing freely from the nearby tourist village of Nazlet al-Samman and an inadequate sewage system at the well-known Mena House Hotel. 

   Once a sleepy town at the edge of the desert, Nazlet al-Samman has mushroomed in the past 20 years with an injection of funds earned by locals in the Persian Gulf oil countries. 
The town boasts an ever-sprouting array of tourist shops selling pharaonic bric-a-brac, with names like Moses' Place, Pharaoh's Perfume Factory and Cleo's Bazaar. 

   Just to the northwest is the Mena House Hotel, built in 1868 with 150 rooms to house dignitaries assembled for the opening of the Suez Canal. 

   The stately hotel's reputation grew over the decades, as it hosted Charlie Chaplin, British Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Jimmy Carter, and Winston Churchill and others. 
In 1974, 400 rooms were added. 

   Mr. Hawass said that no sewage system was installed to meet the needs of the bustling village and that the hotel's system was inadequate for its expanded size. 
Thus, excess waste water entered the water table and undermined the Sphinx. 

   Before the recent study, Mr. Hawass said, it was assumed the statue was deteriorating because of changes in the underground water table, caused by the Aswan High Dam's regulation of the Nile River's flow. 

   Now that the cause of the damage is determined, he said, work will begin on repairing it. 

   Egyptian specialists are being joined by others from West Germany, Britain and the University of Louisville in the U.S. to formulate a long-term save-the-Sphinx plan. 

   The government already has allocated $2.3 million for a new sewage system aimed at halting the dirty-water flow beneath and around the Sphinx, Mr. Hawass said. 

   A committee set up to oversee repairs met yesterday and approved plans to have a masonry support of limestone blocks laid just below where the chunk of rock fell in February, then to replace the rock on July 9. 

   Mr. Hawass said restoration work in recent years, especially an effort that began in 1982 and that was stopped when the latest piece fell, didn't match ancient attempts to protect the monument. 
The first on record was a patch-up campaign that began 1,000 years after the Sphinx was created about 2,500 B.C. 

   Mr. Hawass said cement used to secure loose rocks after 1982 had turned the limestone to powder. 
"The cement didn't allow the rocks to breathe," he said. 
"Now we're removing all the cement and testing gypsum mixed with rocks from Giza Plateau itself to see if the mix can't protect sensitive areas." 

   The team of local and foreign specialists also is to study the effects on the Sphinx of Cairo's air pollution, which on most days can be seen from Giza hovering in layers above the city of 12 million. 

   Next to the Cheops Pyramid, the Sphinx is the most popular among Egypt's thousands of monuments. 
But as Egyptians laugh at many of the modern world's tribulations, they have chuckled at the Sphinx's sewage problem through newspaper cartoons. 

   In one cartoon, the Sphinx has lost his ever-present subtle smile and says, "I don't care whether they call it waste water or sewage runoff, this stuff stinks." 

   In another cartoon, pharaohs Cheops, Chephren and Mycerinus, builders of the world's three most famous pyramids on the plateau behind the Sphinx, stand before an immigration officer, obviously ready to leave town. 
"We don't care what country you choose," one pharoah says, "as long as it has a sewage system." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
