ID: 210	RANK: 77	SCORE: 5.368476
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870804-0070 </DOCNO>
<HL> New Corporate Program Lets Employees
Compare Local Doctors' Fees and Training
---
By Thomas E. Ricks
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> RDR
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)
INSURANCE (INS)
FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN>
<DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "I've known for years that there are doctors who rip us off," says Joseph Charles, who oversees employee benefits for Ryder System Inc. 

   Now Mr. Charles is getting Ryder's employees to do something about it. 
Using data that the company collected and computerized last year, he can show an employee, for example, that one Miami doctor's fee for a gall-bladder removal is two or three times what another local doctor with better credentials charges for the same procedure. 

   That information is contained in Medfacts, a little-noticed but apparently unique program that Ryder, a transportation and business-services concern, began earlier this year. 
Using responses from 1,400 physicians in the Miami area, the company is able to give employees who are looking for a doctor detailed information about local practitioners' training and fees. 

   For Ryder, such examples as the gall-bladder procedure reflect the survey's most important finding: that the best medical care doesn't have to be the most expensive medical care. 
Meanwhile, employees who have used Medfacts like being given the information without being ordered how to use it. 
Doctors say they don't find the company's questions intrusive. 
And specialists in medical economics say programs such as Medfacts that help consumers to make informed decisions are the wave of the future in U.S. health care. 

   "It's not just a good idea, it's a great idea," says Dr. Paul Ellwood Jr., the Minnesota neurologist and health-care consultant who coined the term "health-maintenance organization." 
Adds Princeton University health-care economist Uwe Reinhardt, "Ten years from now, it (programs such as Medfacts) will be routine." 

   That prediction may be a bit optimistic. 
Medfacts' developers concede that the program is only a first, primitive step toward helping individuals decide which doctor or hospital to use. 
Where a doctor was educated and trained are, at best, only hazy indicators of the quality of care that the doctor delivers. 
And the survey itself isn't a random -- and, thus, authoritative -- poll of the Miami medical community. 

   With some improvements that Ryder is already discussing, however, Medfacts and programs like it could have a lasting effect on the U.S. health-care system, industry specialists say. 
David Rahill of Johnson and Higgins Inc., a New York-based health-care consulting concern that works with Dr. Bryan Latham, the inventor of Medfacts, likens the potential effect of such programs to the acceptance of Japanese automobiles in this country. 
As with those cars, he predicts, American consumers will realize that quality doesn't always cost more. 

   Dr. Latham, a lanky, soft-spoken surgeon from North Carolina, first began thinking about what eventually became Medfacts in the late 1970s, when he was medical director of United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit in West Palm Beach, Fla. 
"Employees would come to me with bills so large that their insurer wouldn't pay them," he says. 
So he drew up a list of the fees of doctors he knew, and began showing it to employees. 

   Last year, he and Ryder set out to build a more advanced version of that list. 
First they mailed surveys to the 4,000 members of the Florida Medical Association in south Florida who aren't in secondary specialties such as anesthesiology or pathology. 
Then they compiled the responses and made them available to Ryder employees. 

   Because the data is computerized, an employee can pull out information in a variety of ways. 
It is possible to cast the net so narrowly as to ask for board-certified female gynecologists between the ages of 35 and 55 practicing in southern Dade County who provide second opinions. (The computer yields one.) 

   But perhaps the most important benefit for Ryder is the ability to establish some link -- however tenuous -- between the quality of medical care and its cost. 
When the initial responses were totaled and averaged, Dr. Latham and Mr. Charles discovered that foreign-trained doctors regularly charge more than U.S.-trained ones in that area. 
In the category of gall-bladder removals, for example, the doctor charging $1,200 -- the lowest fee in the survey -- was educated at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York, while the doctor charging $2,500 is a graduate of the University of Cartagena in Colombia. 

   Even when one ignores where a doctor was educated and simply categorizes him or her according to board-certification, those who aren't certified again prove more expensive. 

   Medfacts' creators are quick to say that the name of the school on a doctor's degree isn't an indication of ability. 
"There are good foreign medical schools," says Dr. Latham. 
But, he adds, "generally speaking, people feel safer with the standard of education that exists in the U.S., Canada and a few other countries." 
The data in Medfacts, though incomplete, indicate that "as quality goes up, cost goes down," he says. 

   Dr. Robert Brook, who studies quality-care issues for Rand Corp., the Santa Monica, Calif.-based think tank, says there is little other evidence to support or refute that conclusion, but calls it "a reasonable hypothesis." 
Dr. Ellwood, the Minnesota consultant, says "I've felt for a long time that good medical care costs less." 

   While these specialists quibble with education as an indicator of quality, all applaud Ryder's effort. 
Dr. Latham and Mr. Charles are now talking of refining Medfacts to include such data as the outcome of operations and the number of times a surgeon performs a given procedure. 

   For the present, Medfacts is expected to reduce Ryder's medical costs by less than $75,000 a year. 
But if the initial payoff is small, so too is the expense. 
Mr. Charles says the program cost less than $50,000 to set up, and should cost less than $10,000 a year to keep current. 

   "What we're trying to do is make our employees more intelligent consumers," says Mr. Charles. 
"By not putting people in the hands of quacks, by getting quality care and getting people back to work, I'm saving the company money." 

   But as Ryder talks of improving care and lowering costs, few corporations appear to be following its lead. 
That could be because doctors elsewhere are more resistant to divulging fee information. 
Yet Dr. Latham points out that he has surveyed doctors in Connecticut and West Virginia, as well as Florida. 
Rather, he blames corporate America, which he says is happy to complain about the high cost of medical benefits but generally unwilling to do anything about it. 

   In 1981, he recalls, "A top official of United Technologies told me, 'This is very radical. 
We've got an image to protect, and doctors in Hartford we don't want to offend.'" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
