ID: 210	RANK: 93	SCORE: 5.159581
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880727-0133 </DOCNO>
<HL> Speed, Cost and Cachet Aid Growth of Electronic Mail </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jeffrey A. Tannenbaum (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> EDP TEL </IN>
<TEXT>
   Michael Overland lives in Millburn, N.J., thousands of miles from two sisters in Canada and Australia. 
But the Canadian-born psychology student says he feels closer to his sisters than he has in years. 

   Using an inexpensive home computer, Mr. Overland sends "e-mail" (the "e" stands for "electronic") almost daily to Vancouver and Sydney over a network called EasyPlex, which he reaches by telephone lines. 
His messages cost an average of 40 cents each for about 2,500 characters and usually become accessible on his sisters' computer screens within 20 minutes. 

   "It's many times faster than a letter and a lot cheaper than a long-distance phone call," he says. 
"But you do it more often. 
It ends up habit forming." 

   Increasing numbers of Americans are catching the habit. 
Many personal-computer owners are attracted to e-mail by its speed, relatively low cost and high-tech cachet. 
In offices, computer mail is helping workers to cut down on meetings, paper work and rounds of telephone tag. 
And e-mail use is expected to keep growing, especially in the workplace, as new developments allow for greater interaction between various types of systems. 

   Already, "it would be virtually impossible to find a Fortune 1000 company that doesn't have a community of electronic-mail users," says Michael Cavanagh, executive director of the Washington-based Electronic Mail Association. 
The five-year-old trade group says an estimated six million Americans now send or receive e-mail, up from about five million last year. 

   The term "electronic mail" is often used to cover a variety of technologies and admixtures of technologies. 
Old-fashioned telex, or teletypewriter exchange, networks are considered by some to produce e-mail. 
So are rapidly proliferating "fax" machines, which transmit facsimiles of documents over phone lines. 
Another new form of delivery, called voice mail, uses computer-generated voices to relay messages over the telephone. 

   In the purest form of e-mail, however, messages are composed on a computer terminal and sent over a telephone network to another computer; no paper copy is necessary. 
Electronic Mail &amp; Microsystems, an industry newsletter, says the number of computer-accessible "mailboxes" (niches of computer memory dedicated to mail) linked to public networks in this country has already risen to more than 1.5 million, from 450,000 in early 1984. 
And Frost &amp; Sullivan Inc., a New York consulting firm, predicts that the total U.S. market for electronic-mail services and software will nearly triple to $1.2 billion by 1992, from about $415 million last year. 

   All this growth is bringing e-mail to a critical takeoff point, some executives and analysts suggest. 
For one thing, a war for market share is raging as about a dozen companies, soon to be joined by the regional operating companies spun off by American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co., vie to dominate the industry. 
"In the next three years, the field is going to (narrow) to two or three -- that's the law of the jungle," says a spokesman for British Telecom's Dialcom Group, a Rockville, Md., provider of e-mail services to businesses. 

   Meanwhile, the telecommunications industry is moving toward adoption of a world-wide standard, called X.400, for interconnection software. 
Within a few years, such a standard could enable many different systems to exchange mail more readily. 
Currently, incompatibility between most networks prevents many e-mail users from reaching one another. 

   Some networks already are linking together, a process that X.400 might speed. 
Subscribers to EasyPlex, for instance, which is operated by H&amp;R Block Inc.'s CompuServe Inc. subsidiary, now can exchange messages with users of MCI Communications Corp.'s MCI Mail system. 

   Over the past year or so, several public networks have also made themselves compatible with some of the private e-mail systems used inside corporations, including those sold by International Business Machines Corp., Data General Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp. General Motors Corp.'s internal system, for instance, is now connected to Western Union Corp.'s EasyLink, and Du Pont Co.'s system is connected to MCI's. 

   The growth of EasyPlex illustrates e-mail's growing popularity. 
CompuServe lists more than 400,000 users for the service, up from 155,000 in 1984. 

   But while e-mail systems may be gaining fans, they aren't always foolproof. 
Like most computers, those in e-mail systems sometimes fail. 
Mr. Overland says that the system on his sister's end in Australia is occasionally down, and no communication is possible for hours at a time. 

   As for the cost, e-mail rates generally depend on a range of factors such as time of day and the speed at which the message is transmitted into the network. 
Those who receive the messages also pay a fee for hookup to the system and a per-minute charge while they're on-line. 
And some e-mail systems have monthly minimums, or are available only as part of a broader package of data services, subscription to which can cost $100 or more a year. 

   Overall, however, the cost of using e-mail has "declined precipitously during the last three to four years," says a recent report by Frost &amp; Sullivan. 
This is the result of faster hardware and more efficient software, as well as rate cuts by some networks. 
In May 1987, for example, CompuServe dropped its hourly rate for certain fast-transmission users to $12.50, from $19.50 evenings and $22.50 during the day. 

   For some computer buffs, though, e-mail is practically free. 
They operate or tap into computer-network "bulletin boards," which are usually donor supported and allow people to exchange electronic mail. 
While the messages are typically open for all to read, private e-mail -- which, as on fee-charging networks, is accessible only to those who know the right password or code -- can also be sent through the bulletin boards. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
