ID: 210	RANK: 95	SCORE: 5.149905
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871201-0031 </DOCNO>
<HL> Your Money Matters:
Coin Dealers Seek to Boost
Image With Accreditation
---
By Michael Siconolfi
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)
COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The rare-coin industry is stepping up efforts to weed out unethical dealers -- and to make the field more appealing to investors. 

   The push for self-policing, mainly through accreditation programs, comes as federal and state officials are cracking down on fraud in rare-coin sales. 
"If the industry doesn't take this important step to self-regulate now, the government is likely to do it for them," says Trish Butler, accreditation director of the Industry Council for Tangible Assets, a trade group. 

   The ICTA began recruiting dealers for its accreditation program in October. 
The program includes a thorough background check by a private investigative firm to determine the dealer's business practices and financial stability as far back as seven years. 
Any business-related conviction disqualifies a dealer. 
The program also includes advertising and marketing guidelines for dealers, and dealers are required to adopt a "risk disclosure" statement outlining to customers the risks of rare-coin investing, such as the subjectivity of grading and short-term price risks. 

   So far, the ICTA effort has the backing of about 150 dealers, and the group hopes to double that number by the end of the first year. 
It is "the only such effort created by the industry, for the industry and open to all rare-coin dealers, not just members of our association," says ICTA member Luis Vigdor, senior vice president of Manfra, Tordella &amp; Brookes Inc., a large New York dealer that is changing its name to MTB Banking Corp. 

   The American Numismatic Association, a collector organization, also has been looking to form an accreditation program for several months but hasn't agreed on any definite plans, a spokesman said. 

   The Professional Numismatists Guild, a private group of larger dealers, is seeking to attract more dealers to its own accreditation program. 
The group is offering associate membership to dealers with $25,000 in assets and two years' experience, compared with $100,000 and five years' experience for full membership. 
A strict peer review also is required. 
The $25,000 asset requirement still would exclude most rare-coin dealers. 

   Although many dealers see the accreditation programs as an important step in improving the industry's image, other dealers are skeptical of whether the efforts will be objective. 
"It's all politics and baloney," says Martin Paul, president of Rarities Group, a Marlborough, Mass., coin dealer. 
"It's not how ethical you are but who you know" in the accreditation programs. 

   Meanwhile, federal and state officials are increasing efforts to inform investors about coins and to combat scam operators. 
The Federal Trade Commission this year has filed several fraud cases against rare-coin dealers and telemarketers, and officials say the investigation is continuing. 
The FTC also is preparing a brochure for consumers on rare-coin investment risks. 

   Last month, the Better Business Bureau of New York published a new guide for novice numismatists explaining, among other things, the risks of rare-coin investing. 
The bureau also asked several small New York area coin dealers to withdraw ads suggesting government affiliation or implying a guaranteed high return. 
Several of the firms have since discontinued or changed the ads, the bureau says. 
The dealers that haven't complied will soon be referred to the state attorney general's office, a bureau spokeswoman says. 

   Dealers, meanwhile, are taking it upon themselves to disclose information about investment risks. 
"More disclosure is where the industry is heading," says Silvano DiGenova, president of Philadelphia coin dealer Tangible Investments of America. 
"A client should know exactly what he's getting into." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
