ID: 245	RANK: 24	SCORE: 7.806299
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870623-0005 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Film:
Pentagon Lends a Hand to Hollywood -- Sometimes
---
By Joanne Kaufmann</HL>
<DD> 06/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Washington  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   "Would you get me the latest box-office figures on 'Gardens of Stone'?" asks Maj. Gen. Charles Bussey. 

   Lt. Col. John Chapla, the Pentagon's chief of Army Public Affairs, hurries to comply, and not just because an order is an order. 
He has a vested interest in the success of the movie that centers on the infantry unit responsible for burial ceremonies at Arlington National Cemetery. 
After all, his office did provide technical expertise to director Francis Coppola as well as the use of two military bases. 
And Lt. Col. Chapla doesn't mind saying he hopes "Gardens of Stone" will do for the Army what "Top Gun" did for the image -- and recruitment figures -- of the Navy. 

   Meanwhile, movie producers, also taking note of "Top Gun's" top-flight performance at the box office -- more than $300 million world-wide gross -- are scrounging for scripts about the Air Force, the Marines and the Coast Guard. 
"I would say that the military is a hot movie topic now," says Lt. Scott Campbell, a Los Angeles-based Navy liaison officer whose department gave considerable technical aid to the makers of "Top Gun." 
"The Vietnam War was not very popular, and now with 'Platoon' and 'Hanoi Hilton' the field has broken open." 

   If "Top Gun" is any indication, Hollywood's desire for big box office and the military's desire for a good popular image make for a profitable partnership, one forged at the office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs. 
Billeted in the Pentagon, the office reviews some 200 scripts a year, all requesting assistance ranging from advice about ribbon placement on a uniform and the correct way to salute to the use of stock footage, military installations and aircraft carriers. 

   But the cooperation of the Public Affairs office doesn't come without cost or conditions. 
"A movie we assist has to be authentic in its portrayal," says special assistant for audio-visual media Donald Baruch. 
"If it portrays actual events and people it has to be authentic. 
If it's a fictional story it has to be feasible," adds Mr. Baruch, whose office worked on "The Right Stuff," "Hanoi Hilton," "The Great Santini," "Hamburger Hill" and "Biloxi Blues." 

   "I wouldn't call 'Top Gun' absolutely realistic," he acknowledges, "but the basic format is realistic. 
You have to make some allowance for dramatic situations. 
You do allow the film makers some leverage." 

   Still, the allowance the military makes for dramatic situations does not include terrorism, vigilantism or a portrayal of Vietnam vets as out-of-control drug addicts. 
It especially does not include forays for Americans missing in action. 
In other words, any movie with the word "Rambo" in the title need not apply. 

   But the Public Affairs office also turned down "Platoon" for its unblinking portrayal of the horror of Vietnam; "An Officer and a Gentlemen" because of its strong language, steamy sex, and, to the military mind, excessively fierce depiction of boot camp. 
"War Games" was refused aid because the Public Affairs office didn't want to give the impression that hackers tapping into a computer could set off World War III. 

   Mr. Baruch denies that the Pentagon aids only those movies that burnish the military brass, pointing out that the military did cooperate with "Fatal Vision," the story of a drug-crazed Army M.D. who murdered his wife and children; and "A Soldier's Story," which dealt with racism in the ranks. 
"We would consider assisting in a picture that portrayed something negative or unfortunate," says Mr. Baruch, "as long as corrective action were taken. 

   "'Platoon' is a good example," Mr. Baruch continued. 
"You have constant brutality. 
There's no real supervision of these people and it makes it look like there was no supervision in Vietnam. 
The theatergoer would think every man had a tour of duty like the one in the movie." 

   Producer Steve Tisch had no problem mustering military support for the flag-waving television series "Call to Glory." 
But he was left out in the cold with "In Love and War," a docudrama dealing with the experiences of an American prisoner of war in Vietnam. 

   "It was clear we weren't going to get help unless we made adjustments in the script," says Mr. Tisch. 
"It was an 'If you scratch my back, I'll scratch yours.' 
I simply wasn't willing to scratch as hard as they wanted. 
I think if you get into controversial material, the military's willingness to help would be limited or possibly nonexistent." 

   "I didn't feel the military pressured me to paint any sort of rosy picture," says "Top Gun" co-screenwriter Jack Epps Jr. 
"The only thing they told us was no excessive profanity and no excessive sex. 
But it's easy to see they're not going to help you if you're painting a negative image of the military." 

   Directors who do find their projects warmly welcomed at the Public Affairs office still must win the approval of the specific branch of the Armed Services they want to dramatize. 
This can be both an obstacle and an opportunity. 
Some branches, it seems, are bolder (cinematically) than others. 
The Army beat a hasty retreat when Clint Eastwood asked for help with "Heartbreak Ridge." 
Unfazed by the movie's rough talk and rougher manners, the Marines gave a hand. 
Ultimately, though, the military did an about-face and dissociated itself from the project, protesting that the finished film fell far short of expectations. 

   "We also have to look out for the interest of other government agencies like the State Department and Environmental Protection Agency," says Capt. Nancy LaLuntas, deputy audio-visual assistant in the Public Affairs office. 
Indeed, "Protocol's" portrayal of State Department functionaries as ninnies and white slavers kept the Public Affairs office from providing assistance to the makers of the 1984 Goldie Hawn vehicle. 

   Once the Public Affairs office and the requisite branch of the Armed Services approve a television or feature film, a project officer is assigned to the set to see that a script doesn't stray too far from its original intention. 
"If there's a plot change, the officer is supposed to tell us," says Mr. Baruch, adding that the military always views a final cut of a movie before accepting a screen credit. 

   The project officer is also charged with the task of ensuring that the actors dress, groom and deport themselves according to military standards. 
"Actors have the most trouble learning how to salute properly," says Capt. LaLuntas. 
"They'll do the Girl Scout or Boy Scout salute. 
They'll also mix up uniforms and wear Marine Corps trousers with an Army shirt." 

   Although the production company doesn't pay a fee for the military's counsel, it certainly foots the bill for the use of high-tag "props" such as F-14s and F-5s, and for the time spent at military installations. 
"A lot of people don't realize they're going to have to pay for the equipment," says Sgt. Kristena Baker, an Air Force Public Affairs staff member. 
"They wake up when we tell them how much all this is going to cost. 
Then they say 'Maybe we can do without an F-4 ($4,000-$6,000 per hour).'" 
"Top Gun" received a bill for more than $1 million. 
"Gardens of Stone" was levied a more modest $10,500. 

   There are limits to the military's cooperation with Hollywood. 
Anything classified is off-limits. 
So is anything that would inhibit the military's operational readiness. 
And while production companies are frequently permitted to film a training exercise, they are given firm instructions not to get in the way of the drill. 
"Some directors think they're commanding officers," says Capt. LaLuntas. 
"They'll say 'Move that plane so it faces into the sun,' or 'Don't let that amphibious assault go at dawn because the light will be better at noon.' 
Well, forget it." 

   "There's no law that says we have to cooperate with Hollywood," says Mr. Baruch. 
"And there's no law that says we can't. 
But if we can get together with them and make an accurate film, it's beneficial for both of us. 

   ---
   Ms. Kaufman is a New York-based freelance writer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
