ID: 245	RANK: 47	SCORE: 7.511619
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880128-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Searching for Truth at Pravda </HL>
<AUTHOR> Raymond Sokolov </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Moscow  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The headquarters of Pravda is a large building in the international commercial style. 
It is plain and serious like Pravda itself, the official daily organ of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. 
I went there as the cultural editor of the Journal to meet with Nikolai Potapov, my counterpart, in effect, at this much larger and obviously quite different publication. 
The Journal's circulation hovers around two million, which makes it the biggest American daily newspaper. 
Pravda prints some 11 million copies each day, but a normal issue runs to only six pages while the Journal routinely exceeds 60 pages. 
Pravda was 75 years old last year and has been a bellwether of party opinion in the arts as in all other areas. 
Another difference between the Journal and Pravda is that Pravda has a swimming pool for the use of its employees. 

   I had not thought to bring a bathing suit with me to the Soviet Union in January, but you could say that free style was nevertheless high on my agenda of topics to explore at Pravda in this era of "glasnost." 
Would a visitor find Pravda's cultural editor ready for a free-ranging chat and possibly even some agonizing re-appraisal? 

   Nikolai Potapov is a genial man of late middle years whose office was the only one of many I saw in Moscow that was not adorned by pictures of Lenin and Gorbachev. 
It is an office of modest size with an Aeroflot calendar on the wall. 
If I understood him correctly, Mr. Potapov is a loyal Member with a good mind, a shrewd ability to move with the times and a professional journalist's ambition to get close to the story. 
He is definitely not running a faceless cell, as was clear from the presence at our meeting of Pravda's venerable film critic, Georgi Kapralov, and its hyperkinetic young theater critic, Nina Agisheva. 

   On my side, as at all official interviews conducted during eight days in Moscow, were a dazzlingly Slavophone translator from New York, Martin Horwitz, and a cultural reporter of independent mind from the Soviet news feature agency Novosti, Nikolai Vishnevsky. 
Mr. Vishnevsky was present because a visiting foreign journalist in the Soviet Union is required to have a local sponsor, and Novosti is the designated hitter. 
This is an annoying fact of life, but in the end a convenience. 
It also costs $100 per day, but Valeri, the self-confessed workaholic at Novosti who arranged the interviews I requested, does extremely clean work and can deliver ministers. 
His ability to do this is definitely a result of glasnost and a ukase from the general secretary insisting on friendliness and accessibility to foreign press. 
The only Soviet agency that refused to see me was Glavlit, the allegedly defanged censor. 
Valeri insisted he could deliver them too, but he had already scheduled me to the nines -- and tens and elevens and so on. 

   In the end I think I disappointed Valeri. 
I gave up on musty Glavlit without a struggle, but insisted on going to Pravda, which was not his idea of the cutting edge. 
Indeed. 
But that was my purpose, to test those placid official waters for evidence of freestyle swimming and to see what sort of person would surface in Pravda's arts department. 

   In manner, Mr. Potapov was very much the commander of his own ship. 
"Glasnost," he said, taking the bait and running with it, "has brought many changes to the map of our culture, and they have made us change our approach in turn. 
Formerly suppressed books have been published. 
Films have been taken off the shelf. 
The change in the administration of various unions has led to a change in the hierarchy of names. 
All this has forced us to change. 
We see Bulgakov and Platonov anew. 
We look differently at their work and at the '30s. 
Before glasnost, critics took a pietistic attitude toward certain names and toward highly placed people. 
Now these same names get a variety of treatment. 
Some have vanished. 
New faces have appeared. 
We are fast replacing the old names with new names, new sacred cows." 

   Now that is one careful statement. 
It puts Mr. Potapov above the fray without making him seem unhappy about having had the rug swept from under him. 
He's just a reporter, but with a mind of his own. 
And that mind, he went on to say, was formed in other circumstances: "All of us are children of our time. 
We grew up with certain values and a hierarchy of names. 
Some of us accepted those values and names sincerely; some did so because of cliquish considerations. 
Today some critics feel superior because their favorite artists are now popular, while those who used to favor the 'artistic generals' feel pushed aside." 

   Mr. Potapov's strategy has been to hang in there and cling to journalistic objectivity as he sees it. 
His review of Yuri Lyubimov's epochal production of Bulgakov's "The Master and Margarita" at Moscow's Taganka Theater before Mr. Lyubimov's banishment in 1984, was, he says, "written with great respect for Lyubimov and very exactly portrayed what the production was like and also made clear its subtext -- a critical attitude toward Soviet life and the implication that the artist must always be in the opposition. 
Even the liberal wing of critics had a positive reaction to my review. 
It caused a big splash. 
The press reaction was: Pravda attacks Lyubimov. 
That just brought him extra popularity, and the play went on normally. 
It wasn't like the old days." 

   For a conservative Communist Party veteran, Mr. Potapov has evolved with the new policy, but he hasn't jumped into a new skin. 
He is frank to say he hasn't much liked the new crop of plays, but he then lists several he has liked, including the sensational "Brest Peace," in which Mikhail Ulyanov stars as Lenin and squares off against the formerly unmentionable Bukharin. 
Well, Mr. Gorbachev went to see the same play, thus giving it his "nihil obstat." 
So Mr. Potapov is once again on safe ground. 
But the difference between his guarded acceptance of the new order and a more wholehearted endorsement became clear when Ms. Agisheva, the theater critic, began to talk about her beat. 

   Without contradicting her boss, this confident young woman in violet sweater and boots launched into an impassioned defense of democratization in the theater, said it would take time for a demoralized Soviet theater to reorganize itself, opined that the "main danger to us was not the Stalin in the grave but the Stalin in our minds," gave a plug to Anatoly Vassiliev's theater called the School of Dramatic Art (which is now putting on Pirandello's "Six Characters in Search of an Author"), and called attention to the new phenomenon of theatrical sponsorship by small collectives. 
Moscow Sewing, for example, has adopted one of the new "off-Broadway" theaters that are called studios. 

   "Patronage like that used to be sneered at," chimed in Mr. Potapov. 
"It was pure communist arrogance to think that charity was beneath our society. 
But the government couldn't handle everything." 

   Through all of this discussion, which lasted about an hour, Mr. Kapralov, the film critic, remained silent. 
He is Mr. Potapov's deputy, a trained art historian, author, a gentle intellectual in three-piece suit, argyle socks and loafers. 
He's been in favor of showing certain banned films for years, he says. 
His prime example was a film called "The Sixth of July" that portrays Lenin as a three-dimensional person instead of a kindly saint. 
It was shown, "with great difficulty, and then disappeared." 
At the time, critics in Pravda and the magazine Ogonyok supported it, but it still was suppressed until a recent revival on Soviet television. 

   Glasnost in the film world here has given new meaning to the word release. 
The most important movie "released" from the censor recently was Tengiz Abuladze's "Repentance." 
Shot in the director's native Georgian S.S.R., "Repentance" (which also was distributed in the U.S. this winter) is a surreal drama of Stalinist repression. 
The Secret Police is never directly named, but its agents are clearly meant when villains come on screen in suits of medieval armor. 
Why did Mr. Abuladze resort to surrealism? 
Mr. Kapralov paused for a minute, as if he hadn't considered the possibility before of seeing the mass arrests of the '30s reenacted directly on screen. 
Then he said: "Abuladze used surrealism because, honestly, if he had really shown what happened it would have been unendurable. 
For the audience as well as for the authorities." 

   But now, at a time when Mr. Abuladze can win a Lenin Prize, Mr. Kapralov thinks no subject is impossible and that that comparative luxury brings problems of its own: "Before, when you couldn't do things, everyone had ideas. 
You could just wave your hand and you had 'made' the film. 
Now it's a lot harder and people are in a quandary." 

   Mr. Potapov confessed that he too was looking for the right way to look at some of the new works coming out in fiction in which, in his view, the writer speaks his mind so directly that any pretense at artistic artifice seems to have been abandoned. 
But Mr. Potapov also was visibly determined to succeed at this personal restructuring process. 
There was no turning back from "perestroika," for him or for Soviet society, "because the will of the Party and the people coincide. 
Renovation has got to go on." 

   ---
   This is the fourth in a series of articles about life in the Soviet Union. 
Tuesday: The cultural world restructures. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
