ID: 245	RANK: 58	SCORE: 7.378828
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871105-0093 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Film: Attenborough and Apartheid
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 11/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   "Cry Freedom" is billing itself as "The True Story of the Friendship That Shook South Africa and Awakened the World." 
That may be the film director Richard Attenborough set out to make, but it isn't the film he made. 
The film he made is so wrongheaded, stultified and incoherent it's hard to tell exactly what it is. 
Roughly, you could say it's the story of how a white liberal journalist got his story -- and how he got it out of South Africa. 

   Mr. Attenborough has been congratulating himself in the press for his willingness to tackle this "controversial" subject (though who in his world -- the film-making world -- would object to an anti-apartheid position?). 
Perhaps he should be congratulated for persuading a Hollywood studio to back a movie about a political figure -- but why wouldn't it? 
He is, after all, the man who made a commercial movie out of the life of Mahatma Gandhi. 

   Here Mr. Attenborough has avoided the tragic story of the martyrdom of Stephen Biko, the young black leader who was beaten to death in a South African jail. 
Instead, the director has chosen to focus on Donald Woods, a former newspaper editor who became Mr. Biko's friend and biographer -- and who served as a consultant for this movie, which was based on his books. 

   The movie does get off to a promising start. 
The camera pans a vast junk heap of a settlement, a dismal place where children and chickens live side by side in makeshift shacks. 
It's morning in South Africa, in 1975 at the Crossroads, an illegal black settlement. 
Despite the squalor, there's a kind of peacefulness. 
Women prepare food over open fires; children stir in the dirt paths. 
Then, a brigade of trucks and troopers bursts onto the scene and begins a brief round of terror and destruction. 

   The camera cuts to a quiet, drab house where a young black woman listens to a radio account of the raid. 
"Many of the illegals voluntarily presented themselves to the police," the announcer reports. 
The camera cuts back to reality, to the sight of bulldozers rolling over shacks and troopers roughing up their former inhabitants. 

   Then the movie falls into a torpor from which it doesn't recover until the last scene more than two hours later -- the reenactment of the shameful historic moment in 1976 when troopers machine-gunned to death 700 protesting black schoolchildren. 

   In between these epic bookends comes a lot of dull exposition. 
The movie does provide lots of valuable information for the mass audience it hopes to reach; for example, the grotesque rules of apartheid are spelled out. 
But very little is dramatized; most of the information comes conversationally, in little lessons the various characters recite for one another as they walk through a township's streets, or sit around a table. 

   Whatever one might think about "Gandhi," at the very least it had a sense of scale and pomp and circumstance, like a military processional. 
Gandhi as a historical figure was duly extolled. 
Except for one or two scenes, Mr. Attenborough's Biko doesn't have much presence at all. 
We don't get what it was that made him a catalytic force, and we certainly don't get any idea of who he was. 

   That's because Biko, like nearly everything in "Cry Freedom," comes at us through the eyes of Woods. 
Biko exists in this story simply as a device to raise Woods's consciousness, to force him to confront the hypocrisy he faced daily as a liberal living in South Africa. (His newspaper deplored apartheid yet he, like most whites, benefited materially from the system. 
He lived in an extremely grand style for a newspaper editor, with his wife, five children and a dog, tended by a live-in black maid.) 

   Kevin Kline, his hair dyed gray, plays Woods in a perpetual state of wryness. 
This usually graceful actor walks through this movie arthritically, a style Mr. Attenborough seems to favor since he brings it out of most of his actors. 

   Denzel Washington gamely tries to shake off the halo Mr. Attenborough has pasted onto Biko. (The halo is quite literally there; in many scenes a shimmery light glows around him.) 
But the actor has been asked to portray a symbol, not a man, and an imprecise symbol at that. 
The film's fuzziness on detail makes it impossible to figure out how Biko operated or what, exactly, his power base was. 

   There are only hints. 
He testifies at a court hearing with the cool of a seasoned debater. 
He speaks to a crowd gathered at an illegal rally and for once, in this movie, you get some sense of the emotional charge he could carry. 

   Mostly, though, Biko is kept at a distance and Mr. Washington doesn't have enough force to bring him closer. 
And the film makers' peculiar decision to place his death in the middle of the movie is incomprehensible -- almost as incomprehensible as their refusal to dramatize it. 
Most of the action in this film takes place off-camera. 

   Once Biko dies, the movie goes completely amiss. 
The cruelty of the reigning Afrikaners is aimed at Woods, who by then has become a Biko champion. 
Woods gets "banned," as Biko was banned. 
But the newspaper editor's prison is his house, which with its lovely gardens and swimming pool doesn't look like hard duty. 
Still, Woods can think of little else but escape from this bower. 
He feels he has to get out of South Africa with the book he's written. 
How does he reach this important decision? 
We are never told. 
This is typical. 
There are so many unexplained faits accomplis in this movie, you keep thinking you walked in in the middle. 

   The second half of the picture goes into great detail about how Woods will escape with his family. 
It is a story with some moral grandeur to it, but it's hard to see how the flight of this reformed liberal can be described as a cry for black freedom. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
