ID: 245	RANK: 9	SCORE: 9.015787
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871029-0112 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film:
Triumph in Mexico, Trouble in Britain
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 10/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> "Gaby  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   a True Story" is about a young woman with cerebral palsy who becomes a professional writer, to express herself. 
But let me tell you this movie isn't maudlin, or sentimental, or depressing, or doggedly uplifting. 

   In other words, it isn't what you might expect after overexposure to the genre on television. 
"Gaby" is a tough-minded yet emotional piece of work with some extraordinary performances. 
It is a hanky-wringer, to be sure, but the tears are extracted honorably. 

   The movie is drawn from the 1979 autobiography of Gaby Brimmer, then the 34-year-old daughter of Jewish refugees in Mexico City. 
She was raised by loving parents in upper-middle-class comfort, but she was crippled from birth. 
Ms. Brimmer grew up able to move only her left foot. 
She couldn't talk or walk or wipe her forehead. 
Nothing besides that mobile foot worked -- except her brain, which worked overtime. 

   A New York stage actress, Rachel Levin, plays Gaby with urgency and freshness. 
Ms. Levin, who in real life has recovered from Guillain-Barre syndrome, makes you see what Gaby is: a bright young woman who is alternately brave and self-pitying, ambitious and depressed. 
Ms. Levin has an expressive face and body; when her Gaby "talks" by tapping out words on an alphabet board by her foot, she makes you forget about the mechanics. 
You listen to what she has to say. 

   This is Mexican director Luis Mandoki's first big movie and he has done a graceful, understated job of portraying the dynamics of the Brimmer household. 
He has captured the claustrophobia that settled over the genteel villa where Gaby's family lived. 
Her parents encouraged her and loved her, but they were trapped by melancholy. 

   The weight that pulled at them preceded Gaby's birth. 
The movie opens with hints at Gaby's background: prewar photos of her parents' wedding, followed by more photos of them wearing yellow stars on their sleeves, followed by photos of her mother, pregnant and smiling. 

   Liv Ullman plays the mother, Sari -- plays her with special sensitivity. 
She loves Gaby but she's too full of her own private pain to take care of her daughter by herself. 

   Gaby's father (Robert Loggia) is also burdened by ghosts and by reality. 
But he is a practical man who forces himself to be stern with his daughter. 
When she feels overcome by her lot, he plays Beethoven's Piano Concerto No.4 on the phonograph, and reminds her the composer was deaf when he wrote the piece. 
"I refuse to pity you," he says to Gaby. 

   The family's maid, Florencia, was hired when Gaby was small. 
We see her first hanging out the family laundry, ignoring the snide comments of the neighbors' maids about the extra diapers. 
Norma Aleandro, the fine Argentine actress ("The Official Story") gives a quietly complex performance as this withdrawn servant who simply took charge of the child Gaby one night -- and never left. 

   The most vivid and most powerful scenes in the movie take place between Gaby and her high-school boyfriend, Fernando (Lawrence Monoson). 
He also has cerebral palsy, but he can speak. 
They met in a school for the handicapped, where Fernando rebelled against the patronizing teachers and encouraged Gaby to join him. 

   Mr. Monoson is extremely affecting as Fernando, a heartbreaking character, tender and loving with Gaby but also bursting with frustration at his limitations. 
His mother is portrayed harshly, as a dull woman bent on infantilizing her son -- and she ultimately succeeds. 

   Fernando and Gaby decide to take the entrance exam for regular high school. 
For them, the simple routine of studying for the test is exhilarating, because it is so "normal." 
And they are exhilarated, too, by their obvious sexual attraction for one another. 
The usual desperation of teen-age romance is heightened by the extra difficulties their disabilities cause them. 
To make a phone call, for example, Gaby must dial with her toe -- and then she can only grunt with pleasure at the sound of Fernando's voice. 

   When they finally manage to make love, in a series of imaginative, tender contortions, Gaby's mother opens the door. 
Her face, as she slips out unnoticed, is a wrenching portrait of heartbreak and joy. 
That face and this movie are something to see. 

   ---
   British director Stephen Frears and playwright Hanif Kareishi's "My Beautiful Laundrette" was a keen satire of the Pakistani nouveau riche in Margaret Thatcher's England. 
It was an international hit. 
There's even a real Laundromat named after it on Manhattan's Upper West Side. 

   Now Messrs. 
Frears and Kareishi have teamed up again to make "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid," which Mr. Kareishi has described as a contemporary comedy about race, violence, sex and drugs. 
If that sounds like a hectic jumble, so is the picture. 
Its characters' penchant for political rhetoric -- and ironic comments on their rhetoric -- adds to the general confusion. 

   Still, Mr. Frears shows us a powerful vision of London's inner city as a giant riot site, where stores are burned and looted nightly and roaming bands of punks patrol the streets. 
And the Indian actor Shashi Kapoor turns in a tricky dance of a performance as the amiable political leader who's come to England to find reconciliation with his son and to escape the enemies he's tortured back in India. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
