ID: 251	RANK: 61	SCORE: 6.435145
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890901-0115 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890901 </DD>
<AN> 890901-0115. </AN>
<HL> Forty-Four Years Late, Peace in Europe
@  ----
@  By Leszek Kolakowski </HL>
<DD> 09/01/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> EUROP </CO>
<TEXT>
   It is commonly believed that the peace arrangements after the First World War made the Second World War inevitable. 
On closer inspection, this seems by no means certain. 
To be sure, many grievances and and many claims were left unresolved in 1919. 
But so they were after 1945, and for that matter, after every previous European war. 
Many tribes live together in Europe -- sometimes peacefully, sometimes not -- without clearly defined boundaries between ethnic, linguistic and religious communities. 

   The quarrels over these territories must seem exotic to non-Europeans. 
Where, they must wonder, is Dobruja? 
What happened to Karelia? 
Anything peculiar about Upper Adyga? 
Why is Lvov so important? 
Do you really mean to suggest that Catalan and Castilian are two different tongues? 
What do the Basques want? 
What are the Flemish and the Walloons unceasingly fighting about? 
What language do the Alsatians speak? 
Why is Yugoslavia falling apart? 

   Have you never heard of the Cieszyn region in Upper Silesia? 
Thanks for telling me that Rijeka and Fiume are the same thing, but what do they need two names for? 
Who precisely are the Ukrainian Uniates? 
And tell me why -- exactly why -- were the Jews slaughtered by the Nazis? 

   The list never ends. 
Nor do the conflicts. 
If we were to assume that unsettled claims in Europe must inevitably provoke wars, we have to assume that wars in Europe will never stop, for there is no way -- short of Hitlerian and Stalinist annihilation and deportation of entire nations -- that all those claims ever could be settled according to commonly accepted legal, ethnic and historical criteria. 
But there is no reason to accept this gloomy assumption. 
Among Europe's uncountable wars, big and small, there has not since 1919 been a war between democratic countries. 

   This is not to imply that democratic countries have always behaved impeccably. 
Some did revolting things in their dependencies; others displayed an abominable cowardice toward despotic regimes; but they have not waged wars against one another. 
It is not likely that any of the conflicts and grievances within Western Europe today could trigger a European war. 
It is only the post-Yaltan division of Europe, whereby Central European states were forced by violence into the Soviet empire, that could cause it. 
The Second World War was not an unavoidable cataclysm, effected by impersonal forces beyond human control. 
Nor was there anything inevitable in the victory of National Socialism in Germany, or in the Third Reich's dazzling successes between 1938 and 1942. 
The West could easily have defeated Germany at any time between 1937 and 1939, if there had been the will to fight, as Gens. 
Keitel and Jodl admitted. 

   The Germans march into the Rhineland; they annex Austria, the Sudetenland, Bohemia. 
The Reich's early conquests are almost bloodless. 
The Western states are "seriously concerned." 
Hitler laughs: Let them be "concerned," those miserable cowards -- they will swallow anything. 
Everything works as he predicted, blackmail, intimidation, lies. 
So why shouldn't Poland be the next loot? 
There was no reason to expect anything save more "serious concern." 

   But it didn't work out that way. 
Hitler and Stalin divided Central Europe, but war had begun, and nobody could withdraw any longer from the horrible roulette table. 

   The Second World War was the product of the decisions of individuals: of the pussillanimity of those in the West who believed, or pretended to believe, the Nazis' lies; of the Nazis' direct accomplices; and, above all, of Hitler himself. 
Social and psychological conditions made the Nazi seizure of power and all the subsequent genocidal carnage possible; nothing made it unavoidable. 
Retrospectively, events seem to have been carried along by a fatal necessity, but this is an illusion. 
The past is inevitable only once it has become the past. 

   I remember vividly hearing the announcement of the German invasion of Poland on Sept. 1, 1939, and then, two days later, the news of France and Britain declaring war. 
I was just 12. 
Then came the German bombs, and a desperate escape to eastern Poland. 
On Sept. 17, the Soviets occupied eastern Poland and we returned home to Lodz again through burnt-out villages and cities. 
Deportation and five years of murderous oppression followed. 
Of the men in the family, one was killed in battle, another was murdered by the Gestapo, two were sent to Auschwitz (they survived), and a fifth was held in a POW camp (he survived as well). 
A standard Polish family story. 

   In the first weeks of the war, nobody knew what was in store. 
Some older people who remembered the German occupation during the last war expected that this one would be worse, but similar. 
Nothing of the kind. 
We lived through not military occupation but a genocidal terror. 
Some 6 million Poles, half of them Jews, perished by German hands. 

   Poles are amazed when they read memoirs of the German occupation of France. 
French life managed to continue, though at a lower level: The French still published books and magazines, attended high schools and universities, gave each other literary prizes, made movies, watched movies and so on. 
To us, the war meant a catastrophic break of continuity; everything fell apart -- all of life was dominated simply by the will to survive. 

   From the first moment, we Poles deluded ourselves that the Germans would quickly lose the war. 
It was a most beneficial illusion. 
It sustained us, and contributed greatly to the final victory, after long years of suffering. 

   Then the ambiguous peace arrived, based upon a new surrender to another tyranny and on new illusions -- the "democratic cooperation" with Stalin expected by President Roosevelt, perhaps even sincerely, who knows? 
But the fate of Poland was sealed in Tehran, Yalta and Potsdam without Poles' voices being heard, just as the fate of Czechoslovakia was set in 1938. 

   Forty-four years of peace, that is, of non-war, were purchased by the enslavement of Central and Eastern Europe. 
Aspects of the postwar order -- the annexation of the Baltic countries, for example -- had as their only legal basis the Hitler-Stalin pact, decades after both Hitler and Stalin had met their ends. 

   And so, some people in Central and Eastern Europe keep saying that the war has not ended. 
There was no peace treaty. 
Poland's never regained its independence, the ostensible cause of war in 1939. 
But thinking in such legal terms is of little help. 
This peace treaty, a treaty that would take the Europe of 1937 as a legally valid starting point, will almost certainly never be concluded. 
The borders that were drawn by Stalin's decrees were indeed enforced by violence and mass deportations, without the consent of any of the peoples concerned. 

   But 44 years later, as the third generation of inhabitants grows up inside those borders, the most sensible course for Europe is to accept the permanence of those national borders, especially between Poland and Germany in the west, and between Poland, Byelorussia, Lithuania and the Ukraine -- although this should not preclude independence for those countries that were entirely swallowed by the Soviet empire. 
The de-Sovietization of Central Europe will result not from a treaty nor, let us hope, from another war, but from the self-assertion of nations. 
This process has begun and will not stop, however long, difficult and dangerous it may prove to be. 

   The war is coming to an end through the lapse of time, by historical exhaustion (or should we call it convalescence?). 
Within a few years more, the world will be ruled everywhere by people to whom the Second World War will be no more than stories from a textbook. 
The last heroes, the last soldiers, the last hangmen will die or retreat and the living memory will fade away. 
Only then will real peace, based on reconciliation, be possible. 

   To those who lived under German rule or fought against it, May 1945 was a moment of great joy. 
The overwhelming majority of Germans, including anti-Nazis, must have perceived it as a national catastrophe. 
That is natural, that one cannot help. 
But younger generations of all nationalities will feel neither emotion, just as my generation cannot enter into the emotions of the people who witnessed November 1918. 

   Young Germans on the one side and young Poles, Russians and Serbs on the other will not be divided by feelings they have not experienced. 
Their minds will therefore be more open; but not, we may confidently hope, open to the prospect of any future European war. 

   ---Mr. Kolakowski, a fellow of All Souls' College, Oxford, and a professor at the University of Chicago, is the author of "Main Currents of Marxism." 
He was expelled for political reasons from the University of Warsaw in 1968. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
