ID: 229	RANK: 38	SCORE: 13.751123
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870818-0048 </DOCNO>
<HL> REGIONS:
Multistate Lottery's Prospects
Grow, Even Absent Big States
---
By Eugene Carlson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   RULE ONE in the lottery business: The bigger the jackpot, the more tickets you sell. 
So if you're running a state lottery that offers relatively small cash awards, and you know that hundreds -- perhaps thousands -- of your potential customers are playing the multimillion-dollar lottery in the big state next door, your strategy is pretty clear: Double, triple or quadruple your own grand prize, and keep those ticket sales at home. 

   That's exactly what Iowa and Missouri, whose citizens are regular players in the wealthy lottery in neighboring Illinois, hope to do. 
Starting early next year, Iowa and Missouri plan to join forces with several other states in a coast-to-coast, multistate lottery. 

   The idea is to promote the same lottery"America's Game" is one of the names being considered -- in states from Oregon to Rhode Island. 
The states would be linked by satellite every Saturday night for the weekly drawing. 

   The new game is likely to hurt ticket sales in participating states' existing lotteries. 
But organizers of the multistate game are betting that the public's usual response to lotteries will prevail. 
That is, a large population base will produce lots of ticket sales, which will build big jackpots, which will inspire even more sales, far outweighing any revenue loss in single-state games. 
As usual in the lottery business, the odds of winning will be infinitesimal. 

   THE BIG QUESTION is membership. 
Six states, with a combined population of 16 million, already are committed to the plan: Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Oregon, Rhode Island and West Virginia. 
The District of Columbia says it's in, too. 
If past experience is any guide, that should make the multistate lottery one of the nation's richest games of chance. 

   It would be richer still if New York and Illinois, both early supporters of the multistate idea, weren't sitting on the sidelines. 
Illinois Gov. James Thompson is stringing out a decision whether to participate. 
New York's lottery director, John Quinn, says his state won't play unless Illinois does. (New York's legislature needs to approve the state's multistate membership; a bill to that effect apparently died last month when the assembly recessed.) 

   Signing up the two big states would triple the multistate lottery's projected population base to 45 million. 
The small states think this is wonderful, because residents of Iowa or West Virginia would have a shot -- albeit tiny -- at a huge grand prize in a homestate lottery. 
Ticket sales in those states would presumably soar. 

   THE RATIONALE BEHIND LOTTERIES, after all, is to raise money for state government programs and thus ease the bite on taxpayers. 
Oregon's lottery, just two years old, has already earned $70 million for state economic development programs ranging from new university buildings to commercial fishing piers. 
In Illinois, 42% of lottery income goes to elementary and secondary schools. 
Last year, that came to $553 million. 

   Indeed, Illinois, with its own popular lottery, has less incentive than the smaller states to join the multistate lottery. 
It was Illinois, after all, that produced the richest prize won by a single ticketholder in a North American lottery: $40 million in September 1984. 
The huge pot came after the lottery went four weeks without a winner, the grand prize rolling over and growing each week. 

   "During those four weeks, we had tremendous ticket sales," recalls Michael Jones, Illinois's lottery superintendent at the time and now a Chicago-based lottery consultant. 

   It's what lottery directors dream about: a game designed in such a way that every so often, no one wins the grand prize for two or three weeks in a row. 
The prize money builds, newspapers and television give the game big coverage, and people line up everywhere to buy tickets in a sort of gambler's feeding frenzy. 

   But Illinois's grand prize hasn't come close to that level since , leading the state's lottery strategists to wonder how to boost business. 
One way is to join the multistate game. 
Rebecca Paul, who resigned as Illinois's lottery director last week to head Florida's new lottery, thinks that's the wave of the future. 
In Canada, Australia, Switzerland and West Germany, multistate or multiprovince lotteries are the most widely played. 
"I think that's where we're headed three to five years from now," Ms. Paul says. 

   MR. JONES FORESEES a different format. 
"I see the large states getting together in a super lotto." 
He suggests a "triangle game" with Florida, New York and Illinois, or a Great Lakes regional lottery, with Ohio, Michigan and Illinois. 
There is a precedent: Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont already run a lottery called Tristate Megabucks. 

   Ms. Paul, whose Florida game will begin Jan. 15, doesn't like the idea of such fragmented lotteries. 
"I think it's bad for the industry to have competing multistate games," she says. 

   Multistate games aren't the only way to draw more players; states can also change the odds on an existing game. 
Illinois did that in April, introducing a new Wednesday night lotto drawing that makes it easier to win a cheap prize (last week it was one chance in 89 to win $12 on a $1 ticket), but tougher to win the grand prize (one chance in 15.4 million). 
The idea paid off late last month, when the jackpot reached $22 million, Illinois's highest in three years. 

   As for the multistate plan, Sharon Sharp, who took over yesterday as Illinois lottery director, says she hasn't made up her mind about Illinois membership. 
If the answer is yes, Chicago will be the site of the weekly multistate lottery drawing. 
If Illinois says no, the winning numbers will be picked in Des Moines, Iowa. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
