ID: 229	RANK: 59	SCORE: 13.093307
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870120-0089 </DOCNO>
<HL> REGIONS:
States Hoping to Hit Jackpot
With Big Combined Lottery
---
By Eugene Carlson
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/20/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CANDA
CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO) </IN>
<TEXT>
   THE BIGGEST get-rich-quick scheme in the history of the Republic, a multistate lottery, is in the works. 
Just imagine. 
Citizens of New York, Illinois, Oregon and other states competing with each other every week for a single jackpot running as high as $80 million. 
Millions of citizens will buy tickets in this, the closest thing yet to a national lottery, and participating states will reap millions of dollars for worthy causes. 
All of this, lottery promoters say, is the next best thing to a sure bet. 

   Names for the gambling extravaganza are already being tossed around: America's Game and The All-American Game are favorites. 
There is an organizing body, the Multistate Lotto Board, headed by Peter O'Connell, Rhode Island's lottery director. 
Mr. O'Connell says the game will be running by fall. 

   Two hurdles remain. 
Many states need approval of their legislatures to participate. 
And enough states must sign on to make the enterprise worthwhile. 
Odds that each will occur appear good. 

   The idea for a nationwide multistate lottery germinated in the Northeast. 
Small states there have been restless under the existing lottery system, which operates on two basic principles. 
One: The size of a lottery jackpot is determined by the number of people buying tickets. 
Two: As jackpots get bigger, more and more people shell out money to play. 

   THIS PUTS STATES with small populations at a disadvantage. 
Rhode Island's biggest-ever jackpot, $2.2 million, looks puny next to the grand prizes offered twice weekly in neighboring Massachusetts that routinely run $4 million or so. 

   Mr. O'Connell says Rhode Islanders regularly play the Massachusetts and Connecticut lotteries, siphoning off sales that would otherwise stay home. 
"People will chase a large jackpot," he says. 
When New York's lottery was nearing its record $41 million jackpot in August 1985, he adds, "people would get one person and fly him to New York to buy tickets. 
They were abandoning the Massachusetts and Rhode Island lotteries and sending money to New York. 
That tells you something." 

   What it tells small states, Mr. O'Connell thinks, is that they should band together to keep the money at home. 
Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont fought the attraction of the Massachusetts lottery by joining forces. 
Tristate Megabucks, the nation's only regional lottery, has delivered. 
The three states, with fewer than three million people, ran up a jackpot of $9.6 million last June. 

   Canada is Exhibit B. 
The 10 Canadian provinces conduct a combined lottery draw every Wednesday and Saturday. 
The four-year-old nationwide lotto game, run by the provinces themselves, is offered in addition to each province's own lottery. 

   FEWER PEOPLE now play the lotteries in their own provinces, but this is more than offset by huge sales for the nationwide game. 
"If the provincial games in 1982 were at 100, then they're at 80 now, but the total lottery volume is 220," says Guy Simonis, president of British Columbia Lottery Corp. 
Since the provinces run both games, they are money ahead. 

   Revenue this year in the Canadian interprovincial lottery should approach $2 billion (Canadian). 
"This in a country with the population of California," Mr. Simonis notes. 

   Small states aren't the only multistate boosters. 
John Quinn, director of the New York lottery, says it's smart tactics for his state to join. 
If surrounding states that traditionally offer smaller lottery prizes than New York suddenly start offering a piece of the big-buck multistate jackpot, New Yorkers might start crossing state lines to play the multistate game. 
"I think we'd be losing some sales," Mr. Quinn says. 
But if New York's legislature gives the multistate concept a thumbs up, "there's no doubt in my mind our bottom line will improve." 

   HERE'S HOW the game will work: States will sell weekly multistate tickets in addition to their existing lottery games. 
The game will be a lotto format, players selecting six numbers from a predetermined field. 
Each state will administer its own multistate ticket sales. 
If no one has the exact numbers, the prize rolls over and continues to build. 
Organizers say they'll cap the jackpot at $80 million, with any extra being used to build the next grand prize. 

   The winning numbers will be drawn in Chicago, probably on Saturday night. 
States will contribute to the jackpot fund in proportion to the number of tickets they sell. 
If Oregon sells 5% of a week's multistate lottery tickets, it kicks in 5% of the jackpot total. 

   Michael Jones, a Chicago-based lottery consultant, says the key sections are mostly technical, such as how to ensure uniform payout rules and audit standards. 
Putting computer software and drawing equipment in place can be done quickly, he says. 

   The list of interested states has shifted in recent weeks. 
The hot prospects now are thought to include Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, New Hampshire, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, West Virginia and the District of Columbia. 

   Pennsylvania, which claims to offer more lottery games than any state, is on the sidelines. 
"We might be adding one too many products," says lottery director Blair Gettig. 
"Right now, we don't see the advantage." 

   Mr. O'Connell of the lottery board doesn't mind the dissent. 
"I'd start with three states -- New York, Illinois and Rhode Island -- but we expect more," he says. 
"Once we're up and running, it's only a matter of time before they'll all be trying to join." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
