ID: 260	RANK: 25	SCORE: 9.397943
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880512-0081 </DOCNO>
<HL> It's a Good Week For the Astrologers And They Knew It --- But When the Reagans Look To the Stars, the View May Seem Rather Bleaker </HL>
<AUTHOR> Kathleen A. Hughes (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   We were going to print this story yesterday, but our astrologer -- we can't say who she is -- advised against it. 

   She said the moment wasn't propitious, then muttered something about waiting till there is "an angular moon in our lunar return." 

   That's "an excellent time for publicity," agrees Henry Weingarten, the director of New York Astrology Center. 
He has been on radio and television all week, along with practically every other living, breathing astrologer in America. 
It really is a shame the famous old astrologer and Reagan friend Carroll Righter died last week and missed all this. 

   You know why this pseudoscience or alternative religion or whatever it is is suddenly such a rage. 
It's because of that Regan book about the Reagans and where they (at least she) get their advice (at least some of it). 
They get it from the stars, not movie stars, but stars. 
A friend of Nancy Reagan's in San Francisco supposedly interprets the galaxy for her and tells her when the president should go where he goes and do what he does. 
Mrs. Reagan takes that advice, evidently without a grain of salt. 

   As everybody also knows, the president takes his wife's advice on various matters, not just about when to fly to Santa Barbara but also about when to fire guys like Donald Regan, who then sign book contracts with Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

   Since the former White House chief of staff published his memoirs Monday in Time magazine and in hard cover, astrologers have been exceedingly difficult to tune out, turn off or disregard. 

   Sydney Omarr, a syndicated astrologer who appears in 300 papers, says, "I was interviewed by Dan Rather yesterday and Tom Brokaw today. 
Japanese television sent a crew." 
Mr. Omarr says he just made some forecasts about the upcoming Moscow summit at the request of U.S. News and World Report. 

   Mr. Omarr has some other news for us: Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger have been "gung-ho" (a Chinese expression) on astrology, too. 
"I don't want to reveal my source at this time," he adds. 
"My backround is journalism. 
It's unimpeachable. 
I know this for a fact." 

   Whether his sources are as unimpeachable as Mr. Nixon himself, we do not know and cannot say. 
Associates of Messrs. 
Nixon and Kissinger say they are unaware of any interest the two might have in the stars. 
And our own astrologer is no help at all. 
But we do have a sneaking feeling that astrology is here to stay, at least for a few days until everyone is so sick of it that the journalistic pack, book buyers and couch potatoes move on to the next sensation. 
For the moment, however, it really does behoove those of us who know nothing of astrology to root around a bit in the subject, particularly since conversation is inevitably (so our astrologer says) going to turn to planets and sun signs. 
Readers in California obviously have a head start in this. 

   The roots of Nancy Reagan's search for certitude go way back. 
Astronomers say it all began when ancient man felt confused and looked heavenward. 
Western astrology began more than 4,000 years ago in Babylonia with a culture that linked a wide range of superstitions with the movements of the planets. 

   "It arose from a magical perspective on the universe at a time when we didn't understand very much about the planets," says Andrew Fraknoi, the executive director of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, a nonprofit group in San Francisco. 
Astronomy, by the way, is not to be confused with astrology; there's a difference in respectability. 
"We thought by following the planets we could understand the gods and anticipate their whims and try to predict the future," Mr. Fraknoi says. 

   Astrology today is quite a business. 
As many as 1,200 newspapers in the country run astrology columns, sometimes with disclaimers suggesting that it is all for entertainment purposes only. 
There are 10,000 people in the U.S. "who make some part of their living from astrology," estimates Mr. Weingarten of the New York Astrology Center. (Joan Quigley, Nancy Reagan's San Francisco friend, is said to get as much as $5,000 for her readings.) 
Mr. Weingarten says that "qualified" astrologers number only in the hundreds. 

   So who's a qualified astrologer? 
Most trade schools for astrologers do offer intensive training and certification. 
A few cities, including Las Vegas and Atlanta, even require astrologers to pass a test. 
But most cities simply charge a licensing fee and the would-be astrologer is in business. 

   Astrology is actually illegal in San Francisco -- the home of Ms. Quigley, Mrs. Reagan's seer. 
San Francisco bans astrology, palmistry and crystal-ball gazing. 
Does that mean trouble for Ms. Quigley? 

   She, a socialite just back from Paris with a bad cold, says she can barely speak after several days of interviews. 
Asked about the law, Ms. Quigley rasps, "It's never been enforced. 
It has never been called to my attention." 
Perhaps she should have known without being told. 

   Why was it, she is asked, that March 9, 1987, wasn't an auspicious day for a presidential press conference on the Iran-Contra report? 
Ms. Quigley says she won't comment on specific examples, such as that one from "For the Record: From Wall Street to Washington," Mr. Regan's 397-page book. 
She hasn't read it, but then it has been out for only three days. 
She will say this: "A lot of things have been exaggerated. 
It's very embarrassing." 

   Don't ask an astrologer why the planets should care about press conferences and Contras. 
"I can't deal with that question," says Barbara Somerfield, the director of the National Astrological Society. 

   But some things are interesting both to astrologers and to neophytes such as us who need a quick guide to astrological concepts familiar to the First Lady. 

   The basics: What's your sign? 
This question often asked of new acquaintances in California refers to the 12 signs of the zodiac. 
These "sun signs," including Aries, Taurus, Gemini and the rest, are determined for the individual by the position of the sun relative to the constellations at the time of his birth. 

   Those born under one or another of the 12 different signs are presumed to have distinct personalities reflecting heavenly influences. 
The President is an Aquarius because he was born Feb 6, 1911. 
That makes him, like other Aquarians, "half Albert Schweitzer and half Mickey Mouse," according to astrologer Linda Goodman's popular book on sun signs. 
A Cancer, Mrs. Reagan "hates to be criticized, she is deeply wounded by ridicule and she just can't stand being rejected," Ms. Goodman writes, referring to Cancers, not to Mrs. Reagan in particular. 
Whatever astrologers say, whatever one reads in a horoscope, it always sounds plausible. 

   Most astrologers do up very elaborate charts, often using computers, to determine the locations of all the planets at the time of one's birth. 
Then they compare those to the current locations of the planets. 
All of which determines whether we are going to have a nice day. 

   Most astrological terms are fairly arcane; that most of this stuff is beyond understanding lends credibility to the enterprise. 
Today, for instance, the sun squares Mars. 
On certain days, Neptune is on the mid-heaven. 
This means something but what? 
When Mercury is retrograde, the planet appears to be moving backward. 
"It's not a good time to start projects or sign documents," says Judy Miarka, spokeswoman for the American Federation of Astrologers. 

   "Transit" means that a planet is nearing the planets in your birth chart in a significant way. 
If it's Saturn in transit, move slowly. 
"Saturn is the planet of caution," says Ms. Miarka. 

   Come to think of it, maybe we don't want to know what these things mean; that's why we have our own astrologers. 
And, of course, there are always naysayers amid the soothsayers. 
Philip Ianna, an associate professor of astronomy at the University of Virginia, and a colleague of his undertook a five-year study of 3,011 published astrological predictions. 
Only 11% panned out. 
"We were very lenient," Mr. Ianna says. 

   One forecast, lacking specificity as these forecasts tend to do, went as follows: "There will be a tragedy in the Eastern U.S. during the spring." 
Something horrible surely happened to somebody somewhere east of the Mississippi, so that one was right on the mark. 
The ones that were clearly bonkers were rather easy to spot. 
They included predictions that a UFO would land in Arizona. 

   But there's always hope for the future. 
The First Family might very well be interested in knowing now how the summit will turn out. 
For one thing, Mikhail Gorbachev is a Pisces. 

   "Mr. 
Gorbachev is waiting for the other shoe to fall. 
He feels Reagan is holding back like a boxer," says Mr. Omarr, the syndicated columnist. 
"During that summit meeting, Reagan will be very popular. 
There will be certain days where fatigue does take its toll. 
Overall, he will exude sex appeal." 
We'll get back to you on that. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
