ID: 276	RANK: 87	SCORE: 17.622524

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06152153 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06152153 </ACCESS>
<LEADPARA>  Glenn Lovell reviews films on a scale of no stars to 4.; Awakenings.  Penny
Marshall's downbeat, rigorously clinical re-telling of Rip Van Winkle fable.
Robin Williams, at his most mannered, plays nerd neurologist who happens upon
similarities in "sleeping" patients; Robert De Niro is patient who undergoes
miraculous "Charly" cure. PG-13. (star)(star) 1/2  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Weekend  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  FILM MINI-REVIEWS  </HEADLINE>
<TEXT>     Backdraft.  Kurt Russell, William Baldwin star as warring brothers in this
rigorously old-fashioned paean to Chicago firefighters. Effects are quite
spectacular (especially for the climactic chemical-plant blaze), but story is
strictly "As the World Burns" caliber, schmaltzy and formulaic. With Scott
Glenn, Robert De Niro and, as the Dr. Lecter of pyromaniacs, Donald
Sutherland. Directed by Ron ("Cocoon") Howard. (star)(star);    The Comfort of
Strangers.  Paul Schrader and Harold Pinter collaborated on this sinuous,
sensuous adaptation of Ian McEdwan's novel about foreigners in Venice who fall
under the spell of a couple into voyeurism, S&amp;M, etc. Rupert Everett, Natasha
Richardson play the perpetually lost tourists; Christopher Walken, Helen
Mirren have fun with the purposely over-the-top host and hostess. Dark,
unsettling, often rudely funny. R (for nudity, violence). (star)(star)(star)
1/2;    Cyrano de Bergerac.  Edmond Rostand's oft-told tale of bravery,
balcony deceit and the nose "that launched a thousand ships" gets glorious,
cast-of-thousands treatment in this robust French adaptation. Gerard Depardieu
stars as famed swordsman, poet and braggart. PG (violent swordplay).
(star)(star)(star)(star);    Dances with Wolves.  Kevin Costner's sprawling
tribute to the vanishing frontier is old-fashioned epic movie-making at its
best. Borrowing from William Wyler and Akira Kurosawa, Costner has created a
rich tapestry of adventures among the Sioux Indians, circa 1865. Costner plays
a by-the-book military man reborn as a Sioux warrior. Adapted by Michael Blake
from his own novel; music by John Barry. PG-13 (for violence).
(star)(star)(star)(star);    Defending Your Life.  Albert Brooks wrote,
directed and stars in this droll stroll through the hereafter, which now
resembles an antiseptic industrial park. Rip Torn is hilarious as lawyer
charged with making Brooks' case in heaven; Meryl Streep wings it on a smile
and chuckle as our hero's celestial love interest. PG (slight profanity).
(star)(star)(star);    Hamlet.  Franco Zeffirelli, who popularized the Bard's
"Romeo and Juliet" in the '60s, returns with a robust, albeit severely pared
down, version of Shakespeare's most famous tragedy. Mel Gibson shows new range
and depth as a now mostly seething Prince of Denmark, determined to trap his
father's assassins. Glenn Close, Alan Bates co-star. PG (violent swordplay).
(star)(star) 1/2;    Hudson Hawk.  Bruce Willis plays world-class cat burglar
in this ferociously loony caper comedy that combines elements from "Dr.
Strangelove," James Bond cliff-hangers and "Singin' in the Rain." Andie
MacDowell is spy in nun's habit; Richard E. Grant, Sandra Bernhard are
perverse rich couple bent on cornering gold market; Danny Aiello flits in and
out of action as Willis' sidekick. Dumb, dumb, dumb -- but also quite funny in
spots. R. (star)(star);    Impromptu  Judy Davis plays author George Sand in
this amusing, though surprisingly tame, chronicle of the life and loves of a
19th-century freethinker who refused to abide by conventions of her day. A
handsome production, but not insightful or scandalous enough by half. Directed
by James Lapine. PG. (star)(star);    Journey of Hope.  Swiss Oscar-winner
inspired by news account of Turkish family that finds deceit, friendship,
finally tragedy on the road to Switzerland and "new beginning." Hardly the
best of this year's foreign-language nominees, it's still a work of quiet
intensity and undeniable integrity. Directed Xavier Koller. No MPAA rating
(could be PG) (star)(star)(star);    The Killer  Typically bloody,
over-the-top crime melodrama from Hong Kong. Chinese superstar Chow Yun-Fat
plays professional hit man who allows emotions to cloud judgment during "one
last job"; Danny Lee is the renegade cop who becomes his ally in final fire
fight inspired by "Butch Cassidy &amp; the Sundance Kid." Subtitled. No Rating
(would be R for violence). (star)(star) 1/2;    Kindergarten Cop.  "Twins"
collaborators Ivan Reitman and Arnie Schwarzenegger reteam for a clever
amalgam of cop thriller and kiddie comedy. Arnie plays obsessed cop who goes
undercover as substitute teacher to ferret out (quite literally) the son and
estranged wife of a killer. PG-13 (may be too intense for children under 6).
(star)(star) 1/2;    A Kiss Before Dying.  "Fatal Attraction" author James
Dearden's attempt at Hitchcockian thriller misfires badly. Matt Dillon, Sean
Young co-star as psychotic social climber and rich twins high on killer's hit
list (Young is doubly forgettable in dual roles). Inserts from "Vertigo" only
serve to remind how far from the mark this ludicrous concoction is. Taken from
Ira Levin novel, filmed in '56 with Joanne Woodward, Robert Wagner. R
(violence, slight nudity). (star);    La Femme Nikita.  Luc Besson, of the
stylish and empty "Subway" and "Big Blue," returns with a sweet-to-savage
policier that rates a "Wow!" for its visual pyrotechnics and a "Huh?" for its
idiotic story line, which mixes "My Fair Lady" and "Dirty Harry." Anne
Parillaud is the title character, a punkette sociopath made over as government
assassin. R (violence). (star)(star)(star);    L.A. Story.  Steve Martin
shares his love/hate feelings for La La Land in this loony, romantic fable
that owes more of a debt than Martin cares to acknowledge to Fellini and Woody
Allen. Such obvious targets as health spas, freeway gridlock, happy-talk news
come under assault. PG-13 (profanity, comic lovemaking). (star)(star);   
Madonna: Truth or Dare  Material Girl's Blond Ambition tour seen mostly from
the wings, where Madonna, befitting her status as pop diva, holds court and
insults fans, lovers and sycophants alike. How much of the real Madonna is
revealed? Who cares. Thanks to rock-vid director Alek Keshishian, Madonna's
latest "memorial to me" is bitchy, sexy, patronizing -- but never ever boring.
With Kevin Costner, Warren Beatty and Madonna's sleazy older brother among
backstage visitor-victims. R (nudity, profanity). (star)(star)(star) 1/2;   
Mortal Thoughts.  Art-house darling Alan ("Choose Me") Rudolph returns with
his most commercial venture yet, a bleakly funny, blue-collar spin on French
classic "Diabolique." Demi Moore, Glenne Headly play Jersey wives involved in
mysterious (and mutually beneficial) homicides; Bruce Willis is the deserving
victim, an obnoxious wife-beater. With Harvey Keitel as cagey cop sorting out
the facts. R (profanity, violence). (star)(star)(star)(star);    New Jack
City.  Mario Van Peebles makes solid directorial debut with this
blaxploitation spin on "Little Caesar." Wesley Snipes, Ice-T co-star as Harlem
drug czar and the undercover cop who vows to infiltrate his cocaine factory. R
(violence, profanity, nudity) (star)(star) 1/2;    Open Doors  Oscar-nominee
from Italy chronicles triple murder in pre-World War II Palermo and resultant
investigation and trial. Gian Maria Volonte brings quiet dignity to judge who
refuses to go along with killer's or mob's cries for swift justice. Directed
by Gianni Amelio. No Rating (could be R for violence). Italian with English
subtitles. (star)(star)(star) 1/2;    One Good Cop.  Or: Mr. Mom Joins the
Force. Michael Keaton plays New York cop who becomes guardian of three
youngsters when his partner is gunned down. Keaton attempts to skate by on
charm and one-liners, but mix of "Father Knows Best" schmaltz and street
sadism takes it toll. Directed, written by Heywood Gould. R (violence,
profanity). (star);    Only the Lonely.  "Home Alone" team -- producer John
Hughes, writer-director Chris Columbus -- returns with intermittently charming
fable about mama's-boy cop (John Candy) who falls for mortician's assistant
(Ally Sheedy), thereby earning wrath of his Irish mother (Maureen O'Hara in
her first movie in 20 years). Sheedy's morbid profession is good for a few
laughs and scenes between Candy and very salty O'Hara are spirited and funny,
but overall this latter-day "Marty" is as uneven as it is preposterous. PG-13
(profanity). (star)(star);    Oscar.  Sly Stallone attempts a Damon Runyon
fable with mixed results. Stallone himself is humorously discombobulated as
mobster attempting to go straight as daughter plots to elope with chauffeur,
accountant, linguistic coach -- whoever! But comic-opera approach (goosed by
Rossini score) will either leave you slapping your knee or pulling at your
hair. Directed by John Landis. PG (OK for entire family). (star)(star);    Out
for Justice.  Aikido champ Steven Seagal returns in his best cop thriller
since "Above the Law." Ultra-violent, single-minded script pits Seagal's
Brooklyn narc against wigged-out psycho from the old neighborhood (the
baby-faced William Forsythe). Credit the fluid, lightning-charged direction to
grade-B ace John ("Best Seller") Flynn. R (non-stop violence, profanity).
(star)(star)(star);    A Rage in Harlem.  Like the '50s Chester Himes novel on
which it's based, this gangland melodrama plies the sentimental and the
sadistic, the comic and depraved. Results are wildly uneven, but debuting
director Bill Dukes coaxes wonderfully quirky performances from blue-ribbon
cast, which includes Danny Glover, Zakes Mokae, Badja Djola and a deliciously
sultry Robin Givens. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star)(star);    The
Silence of the Lambs.  What could have been ride of the season becomes, under
Jonathan Demme's almost polite direction, a slavish, too-densely plotted
adaptation of Thomas Harris novel about a pair of dangerous sociopaths and the
FBI trainee who uses one to track the other. Jodie Foster is fine as novice
agent who must suppress all traces of femininity to earn her stripes; Anthony
Hopkins, typically, overdoes it. R (violence, gruesome makeup effects).
(star)(star) 1/2;    Shipwrecked.  Crude but entertaining return to "Treasure
Island" territory, compliments of Disney. Norway's Stian Smestad plays gung-ho
youth who becomes more of a Rambo than Robinson Crusoe when washed ashore on
South Seas island; Gabriel Byrne fumes a lot as pirate stand-in for Long John
Silver. Shot in Fiji and Spain. PG. (star)(star) 1/2;    Sleeping with the
Enemy.  Julia ("Pretty Woman") Roberts plays abused wife who stages her own
death, then takes a new identity in idyllic Iowa burg. Patrick Bergin, Kevin
Anderson co-star as stalking husband and new beau, respectively. Source novel
took a stab at dealing with issue of abused wife reassembling her life; movie
reduces premise to slasher cliches. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star);   
Switch.  Another gender-change comedy a la "Tootsie," "All of Me," this time
starring Ellen Barkin as sexist pig named Steve who's reincarnated as
foulmouthed, two-fisted cookie named Amanda. Barkin is mostly hilarious in the
lead, but director-writer Blake Edwards doesn't know where to go with the
premise. R (for gratuitous profanity, nudity). (star)(star);    Teenage Mutant
Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze.  Heroes in Half-Shells return in
broader, funnier sequel to their 1990 hit. Parents will applaud decision to
downplay the violence while lamenting the non-existent plot. PG (may be too
intense for some children). (star)(star);    Thelma &amp; Louise  Susan Sarandon
and Geena Davis are perfectly matched as Arkansas buddies who take a little
R&amp;R from loutish menfolk and end up on FBI's Most Wanted list. Think of it as
a feminist variation on "Easy Rider" and "Butch Cassidy &amp; the Sundance Kid."
With Harvey Keitel, Christopher McDonald and Brad Pitt as suspiciously likable
hitchhiker. Directed by Ridley ("Alien") Scott. Davis is a gas as initially
timid fugitive. R (violence, profanity). (star)(star)(star);    Toy Soldiers. 
Odd, unsettling blend of prep-school shenanigans and Rambo-esque mayhem fro
Mr. High Concept, Daniel ("Beverly Hills Cop") Petrie Jr., here making
directorial debut. Sean Astin, Wil Wheaton, Keith Coogan are among rebellious
rich kids who save Virginia academy from Columbian terrorists; Lou Gossett
Jr., Denholm Elliott are pushover dean and headmaster. R (extreme violence,
profanity). (star) 1/2;    Truly, Madly, Deeply  British comedy with a very
serious message about saying goodbye to the recently departed. Juliet
Stevenson is wonderful as grieving translator; Alan Rickman plays her dead
lover, who returns to console and rearrange the furniture. Opening moments
with Stevenson at her most distraught are moving, but later mix of fantasy and
droll romance doesn't always work. Directed, written by Anthony Minghella. No
Rating (could be PG). (star)(star) 1/2;    What About Bob?  Bill Murray as a
multi-phobic guy who, nearing a breakdown, invades his psychiatrist's New
England vacation. Murray fears everything, but it's shrink Richard Dreyfuss
who ultimately comes unglued. A funny, gradually escalating farce that somehow
makes light of control-freak doctors and therapy junkies without seeming cruel
or exploitive. Directed by Frank Oz from Tom ("Dead Poets Society") Schulman
script. PG. (star)(star)(star);    Wild Hearts Can't Be Broken  Gabrielle
Anwar plays plucky, Depression-era Pollyanna in Disney pick-up about a teen
who runs away and joins carnival act featuring high-diving stallions. Cliff
Robertson, in Buffalo Bill get-up, adds some much-needed tension as Anwar's
initially skeptical boss. Directed by Steve Miner, who does OK by idyllic
opening but allows final scenes to go all mushy and melodramatic. G (OK for
entire family). (star)(star)  </TEXT>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910531  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Friday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  May  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  5E  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,121  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Friday May 31, 1991
00152153,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
