ID: 161	RANK: 92	SCORE: 8.580314
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ920313-0141
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
920313-0141.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Major Work
   Awaits Europe's
   Monetary Union
   ---
   Single Currency Remains
   Years Away, but Steps
   To Prepare Begin Now
   ----
   By Mark M. Nelson
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
03/13/92
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7D
</SO>
<IN>
FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)
</IN>
<NS>
FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)
</NS>
<RE>
BELGIUM (BEL)
DENMARK (DA)
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)
IRELAND (EI)
EUROPE (EU)
FRANCE (FR)
GERMANY (GE)
SCANDINAVIA (SCA)
GREAT BRITAIN (UK)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   LYON, France -- Europeans have to wait up to seven more
years before trading their pounds, marks or francs for new
Euro-notes. But several major preparatory steps have to be
taken soon to begin transforming Europe's monetary politics.
   Indeed, as monetary and banking officials start getting
ready for the single currency, they are discovering a
mountain of work to be done. And since each step creates new
controversies and complications of its own, the officials say
a single EC currency by 1999 means that Europe's monetary
architects soon have to turn over the job to the builders.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   "If we are to be ready on time, we have major work to do,"
says Michel Coste, who heads CEPREM (Centre de Promotion et
de Recherche pour la Monnaie Europeenne), a Lyon group
studying the EC single currency. "The monetary union treaty
{agreed to in December in Maastricht, the Netherlands} sets
the deadline, but leaves a vacuum on many details."
   Several major economic and institutional changes have to
begin this year. Not only do Europe's less-developed
economies have to make major strides to catch up with the
rest of the EC before introducing a single currency, all EC
states have to pass new laws and change monetary and banking
procedures to bring their practices into a more common line.
   Monetary union "is a monumental leap forward," says Yves
Mersch, Luxembourg's treasury director and one of the key
negotiators of the monetary union treaty. "There are
conflicting ideas about nearly every question. We know the
decisions ahead will be difficult."
   The changes in store could begin affecting interest rates,
economic policies and banking regulations long before the
single currency is in place.
   Complicating these crucial early steps is an environment
of political uncertainty, even about the monetary union
treaty itself. Governments, which originally expected no
difficulty in getting the treaty ratified, now face
opponents. EC governments agreed in Maastricht to seek
ratification of the treaty by the end of this year, and they
now plan extensive campaigns to convince voters and
parliamentarians of the benefits of a single currency.
   But even if the treaty is ratified, the road to a single
currency has other potholes, some already in sight.
   For example, by the end of 1992, EC governments will have
to agree on a location for the European Monetary Institute,
the forerunner of the European Central Bank. The monetary
institute will come into operation on Jan. 1, 1994, and will
be responsible for setting up the central bank's structure
and procedures. The central bank will likely simply take over
the facilities and staff of the institute when the final
stage of monetary union begins.
   There's no shortage of cities proposing themselves as
suitable locations, as a group of lobbyists and businessmen
here in Lyon showed recently. Like Amsterdam, Frankfurt,
Luxembourg, London and Manchester, Lyon is hoping that the
negotiation ahead will somehow turn in its favor. The stakes
are especially high: The monetary institute and central bank
will employ several thousand well-paid officials and bring
enormous investment to its host city.
   A president for the institute will also have to be chosen,
probably also this year. EC governments will be looking for
an energetic, influential and internationally recognized
figure who's not afraid of uncertainty or controversy. One
important requirement: He or she can't come from whatever
country wins the location of the monetary institute.
   Other issues, some also highly controversial, have to be
decided soon. EC nations will have to bring their central
bank operating methods into closer harmony, agreeing on
common ways to keep records and intervene in international
currency markets. EC states will also have to agree on how to
determine when their economies are in close-enough alignment
to proceed with the single currency.
   Another controversy concerns how big and powerful the EC
central bank should be. "There is definitely a desire to make
the system as decentralized as possible while making sure
that there is a single, EC-wide monetary policy," says
Jean-Victor Louis, who heads the legal service of the
national Bank of Belgium. But he added that deciding on the
details of how this balance will be worked out will come only
after "intense debate."
   The bigger central banks of Germany, Britain and France
want key tasks, such as intervention on international
markets, to be left to the national central banks. Banks in
smaller countries like Belgium, Denmark and Ireland fear this
would mean that the three biggest banks would in effect take
over the task for the whole EC. The smaller countries feel
they would be better represented in a more centralized
central banking system.
   The EC states also have to settle on a system of financial
and banking regulation. Preventing embarrassments such as
last year's collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International will require states to change their laws and
allow stronger, EC-wide oversight of banking operations,
financial officials say.
   Raymond Barre, the former French prime minister who is
pushing Lyon's candidacy as a site for the central bank, says
he expects these controversies to be settled and the
deadlines to be met. "Many of these controversies now should
be seen in the context of national politics," he says. "In
the end, no one is going to want to take responsibility for
the failure of the single currency."
</TEXT>
</DOC>
