ID: 238	RANK: 100	SCORE: 7.484344
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890804-0143 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890804 </DD>
<AN> 890804-0143. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
@  Television Gridiron Classics
@  ----
@  By Frederick C. Klein </HL>
<DD> 08/04/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> Mt. Laurel, N.J.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It's hardly news that the airwaves will be filled with footballs for six months beginning this weekend, and while the games will vary in terms of quality and suspense it's safe to say that as a group they'll be about ordinary, and subject to the usual vicissitudes. 
Such are the ways of sport. 

   You drama fans out there won't be neglected, however. 
On eight consecutive Sunday nights beginning Sept. 10, NFL Films will produce, and the ESPN cable-television network will air, "The Dream Season," matching "classic" teams from the National Football League's past. 

   "Dream Season" won't be some kind of old-timers' league, so one needn't fear for the now-brittle bones of the likes of Johnny Unitas and Ray Nitschke. 
It'll be the "real" 1985 Chicago Bears against the "real" 1977 Dallas Cowboys, among others, in the only way possible: film clip vs. film clip. 
Folks may disagree over whether the best clips win, but they surely will see a succession of thrillers. 

   NFL Films is the outfit that makes every pro football bash seem as weighty in retrospect as the battle for Stalingrad, so the stakes of the series will be properly grandiose: the selection of the all-time-best NFL team. 

   Twenty championship teams from the past four decades were picked for the tournament by NFL coaches and executives, and arranged into four divisions. 
In addition to six televised "regular season" games, NFL Films has run computer simulations for an entire schedule, and highlights of other games will be shown during halftime of the game-of-the-week. 
The four division winners will "meet" on Oct. 22, and those winners will play in the -- what else? -- "Dream Bowl" the following week. 

   There's been talk that USA Today will run weekly standings and statistics and, as befits Pete Rose's favorite newspaper, point spreads on coming contests. 
Don't laugh. 
Somebody'll bet. 

   Steve Sabol, NFL Films president, says the computer stuff already has been completed, and that he and a half-dozen others in the company know the tourney's outcome. 
He says each has been issued a cyanide capsule and instructed to swallow it if caught and tortured for information. 
Just choking. 

   The engaging Mr. Sabol does not joke about why his firm, an arm of the NFL, is putting together the series. 
"Our job is to perpetuate the legends of pro football, and what better way to do it than to bring back to life the great old teams?" says he in his suburban Philadelphia office. 
"Besides, we've got this wonderful film library, and this is a terrific way to use it." 

   NFL Films indeed has a wonderful library here, rack upon rack of canisters filling a room that measures 40 by 80 feet, and 22 feet high. 
It has filmed every league game since 1964, and has obtained footage of many previous contests as well. 

   Most of the pre-1960 film is black and white, not up to current snuff, and therein lies a rub for "Dream Season." 
Although four pre-'60 squads are in the tourney (the '51 Rams, '53 Lions, '55 Browns and '59 Colts), games involving them will be shown only in highlight form. 
Mr. Sabol affirms, albeit silently, that none will be around for the playoffs. 

   Other obstacles stood in the way of using film to pit teams of different eras. 
Uniforms and playing fields changed, and so did coaches' garbs. 
For instance, John Madden, coach of the '76 Oakland Raiders, which appears in two of the six fully televised games (the '85 Bears do, too, and for the same reason: viewer popularity), wore a dark blue shirt on the sidelines of some games, and a striped white shirt for others. 
"When we showed sideline shots of John, we could only use games when he wore the same-colored shirt," notes Mr. Sabol. 
"That cut our options." 

   But the sheer volume of film on hand, plus the availability of electronic wizardry, has enabled NFL Films to put together a series that's better than passable. 
I watched all or part of the first three weeks' games -- the '77 Cowboys vs. '85 Bears; '84 49ers vs. '66 Packers; and '76 Raiders vs. '69 Chiefs -- and each time had the feeling that what I saw could have been real. 

   The games were true-to-life in the sense that their ratio of hype to action was about two to one for the 90- or 75-minute broadcasts. 
There were pre-game interviews with coaches and players made unusual only by the fact that the contests they were previewing would exist just on celluloid, halftime highlight shows and the usual telecaster blather. 
A lot of the game shots showed teams or players standing alone -- on the sidelines, in huddles, lining up for plays -- and thus required no special ingenuity. 

   "Dream Season" games consist of about 30 complete plays (actual NFL games have about 120) and others in montage. 
Mostly, the producers used footage from games in which a featured team played its opponent's counterpart during its championship season, but clips from other contests also were included. 

   The results aren't seamless. 
The Cowboys-Bears "dream" game, for instance, consisted of many shots from the 1977 match between the teams, which Dallas won, 37-7, and an '85 tilt in which Chicago prevailed, 44-0. 
Thus, you see '77 Bears Jim Osborne and Tom Hicks, and '85 Cowboy Everson Walls, making tackles. 
In some plays, the Bears' No. 55 is Otis Wilson of the '85 team, in others he's Doug Buffone of the '77 gang. 
Wilson is black, Buffone is white. 

   In other plays -- the important ones, says Mr. Sabol -- NFL Films went to some trouble to achieve authenticity. 
The '85 Bears' William Perry sacks a quarterback wearing No. 12. 
It wasn't Roger Staubach of the '77 Cowboys, who wore that number (of course), but Danny White of the '85 Dallas team, whose No. 11 was changed by some kind of magic to a 12. 

   "The authenticity of our games is in their rhythm and 'feel,' not in individual details," asserts Mr. Sabol. 
"I think we succeed there." 

   As I said before, I agree. 
And if anyone wants to bet on the Cowboys-Bears game, gimme a call. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
