ID: 238	RANK: 15	SCORE: 8.919969
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870422-0027 </DOCNO>
<HL> Appeals Court, Backing NBA, Overturns
Ruling on Movement of Sports Franchises
---
By Hal Lancaster
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN>
<TEXT>
   An appellate court ruling has strengthened the control professional sports leagues have over franchise movement, legal sources say. 

   The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco yesterday overturned a summary judgment against the National Basketball Association in its suit against the Los Angeles Clippers. 
The court ordered a trial on the factual issues. 

   The litigation stems from the Clippers' 1984 decision to move to the richer Los Angeles market from San Diego. 
The NBA sued, alleging that the Clippers were required to seek prior approval from the league. 
The suit was dismissed last year by Judge Leland C. Nielsen, who "suggested that the NBA could not possibly win its case under the guidelines established" in an antitrust suit between the Los Angeles Raiders and the National Football League, according to the opinion issued yesterday. 

   In that case, the appeals court ruled that the NFL had violated antitrust laws in opposing the Raiders' move from Oakland. 

   But Judge Nielsen misinterpreted the Raiders case, Judge Warren Ferguson said in his opinion. 
"A careful analysis (of that case) makes it clear that franchise movement restrictions are not invalid as a matter of law," he concluded. 

   Instead, the "rule of reason" must apply to franchise relocation decisions -- meaning that various interests must be weighed to determine whether the move is procompetitive or anticompetitive, the judge concluded. 
Those interests include: Can the team survive in its present market? 
Does the move to a stronger market present travel hardships for other league members? 
Is a market being over-saturated with teams? 

   If the rules established to determine these issues are reasonable, they can withstand antitrust challenges, sports lawyers said. 

   "This sends a clear signal to everyone that the leagues have the authority -- and the responsibility -- to control franchise relocation in most cases," said Steven Ross, a former Justice Department attorney who teaches sports law at the University of Illinois. 
"The decision of where to locate a franchise would be up to the league. 
If the league abuses its power, it should then be scrutinized by the court," he said. 

   Jeffrey E. Birren, general counsel for the Los Angeles Raiders, agreed, adding that "the Clippers tried to turn our case into a per se victory for any team that wants to move. 
That's wrong. 
Our case was not a manifesto for anarchy." 
Ultimately, he said, "what you need are the procedural safeguards, so that neither the league nor the team can act in a capricious manner." 

   Mr. Ross suggested other effects, as well. 
"This may be a defeat for some league owners, who can't use the moving threat to rip off the taxpayers," he said."If this was on the books three years ago, the mayor of Philadelphia could have put his foot down and demanded that the NFL not permit the move and thus avoided putting up millions of dollars of taxpayer subsidies to keep the team from moving." 
Three years ago, the Philadelphia Eagles threatened to move to St. Louis and the city offered subsidies to keep the team from leaving. 

   Mr. Birren, however, isn't convinced that things will change on that front. 
"The league will allow teams the threat to move to get the concessions," he said. 
"That's the unwritten rule for most of the brethren." 

   The NBA was ecstatic over the decision. 
The appellate court says that "if we prove what we allege, we should win," said Michael Cardozo, the league's attorney. 
"The trial judge said that even if we prove what we allege, we can't win because of the Raiders' case. 
No one has won anything yet in an absolute sense, but we're a lot closer that we were." 

   Arn Tellem, the Clippers' general counsel, said he couldn't comment until he read the decision. 

   One professional sport remains unaffected by the legal jousting over franchise movement: baseball. 
Its long-held antitrust immunity prevents teams from challenging its relocation decisions, said Edwin M. Durso, executive vice president of Major League Baseball. 
"But I'm glad to see they have a chance to establish that their league's rules are valid," he said. 
"It's in the league's interest to control the movement of franchises." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
