ID: 238	RANK: 22	SCORE: 8.533782
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870923-0070 </DOCNO>
<HL> Delay of Game: Risks Are Big for NFL
---
By Hal Lancaster and Peter W. Barnes
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/23/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR GE CBS CCB
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Let the games begin. 

   Not professional football games, of course. 
Those contests -- at least with the National Football League's regular players -- ended Monday night when the league went on strike. 

   Rather, the games now getting under way are those between the players and team owners in their contract talks, and those among the NFL, the television networks and the big advertisers who grease the whole television machine. 

   Should players and owners resolve their gripes in the next day or two, everybody will be having a good laugh about all this at next week's tailgate parties in stadium parking lots across the country. (The two sides met for 90 minutes yesterday and are scheduled to meet again today.) 

   But if the strike drags on anywhere near the 57 days of the 1982 strike, a lot of people along New York's Madison Avenue and "Broadcast Row," homes to the major advertisers and television networks, will be standing on line to renegotiate contracts worth hundreds of millions of dollars. 
The brunt of that financial burden will ultimately fall on the NFL. 

   Major financial pressure to settle the strike will come from the three major television networks and ESPN Inc., a sports cable programming service. 
In March, they collectively agreed to pay $1.43 billion over three years for football broadcasting rights. 
The strike isn't expected to seriously hurt short-term network profits, however. 

   The networks are already scrambling to fill their schedules for Sunday and beyond. 
CBS Inc. says it is prepared to rebroadcast last January's Super Bowl game this Sunday, while National Broadcasting Co. plans to air baseball games Sunday. 
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. plans to broadcast a movie in place of its popular Monday Night Football. 

   Why have the football powers-that-be taken away America's weekly pigskin fix? 
Mostly, it has come down to the issue of free agency. 
The players' union originally made a complex proposal with interlocking demands and steadfastly denied that free agency -- the right of players to sell their services to the highest bidder -- was the most important issue. 

   But as the strike deadline approached and passed, even Gene Upshaw, executive director of the NFL Players Association, found himself talking more and more about free agency and less about everything else. 
And Jack Donlan, executive director of the NFL Management Council, said that everything currently on the table is negotiable -- except free agency. 

   The owners have proposed liberalizing the current method of free-agent compensation. 
But junking the entire system? 
Never, says Mr. Donlan. 
Average player salaries, he says, have already jumped to $230,000 from $90,000 in 1982. 

   The owners' fear of free agency is twofold: Should teams bid willy-nilly on free agents, as baseball owners did, they could find themselves wallowing in red ink, as baseball owners did. 
If they refuse to sign free agents, as baseball owners did, they could find themselves on the legal griddle, as baseball owners do. 
Unlike their baseball brethren, however, the NFL owners don't enjoy total antitrust exemption, and would thus face an antitrust suit and the possibility of paying treble damages. 
Baseball's grievances are arbitrated. 

   "They feel they would fare much worse in the courts and that it is better to fight it out in a labor context," says Louis Guth, senior vice president of National Economic Research Associates Inc., a White Plains, N.Y., market research company that has done much sports work. 

   Ironically, the strike was announced the same day as an arbitrator's finding that baseball owners violated their labor agreement with players by conspiring to close down the free-agent market. 
Later that day, the NFL Management Council issued a statement that said, in part: "Today's decision by a baseball arbitrator strengthens our commitment to a settlement without the unrestricted free agency demanded by the Players Association." 

   Nevertheless, both sides will feel considerable economic pressure for an early settlement from the various constituencies affected. 

   NFL owners insist that the league's schedule will be suspended for one week and then resume with teams staffed by previously cut free agents and other assorted couch potatoes -- including, owners hope, some current stars who have threatened to cross the picket line. 
Expect the relentlessly efficient, computerized Dallas Cowboys to dominate these games; they already have a full team drilling, while some rivals have yet to sign a player. 

   Will America watch the games? 
In two separate polls taken recently, more than 60% said they would. 
Teams will offer refunds to ticket holders who ask. 
Most will also offer refunds to luxury-box holders, who represent the largest chunk of unshared revenue in the largely socialistic NFL. Disgruntled corporate lessees could weaken the owners' resolve. 

   In Miami, Dolphins owner Joe Robbie used the $12 million of guaranteed revenue from its 10-year leases on luxury boxes and less-expensive executive-level seats to finance his new $102 million stadium. 
He could become financially stretched by a long strike. 
Indeed, the Dolphins have indicated that they won't provide refunds to those preferred seat holders because the money has been used as collateral for stadium-construction loans. 

   The New England Patriots, plagued by heavy losses and debt and on the auction block for more than a year, know that a long strike "will obviously hurt them financially," says a team spokesman. 
But he points out a mitigating factor: the significant savings on player costs. 

   Michael Duberstein, research director for the players' union, estimates that the average team spends $837,000 a game on player salaries, plus $17,000 in player fringe benefits. 
An additional $200,000 in expenses will probably be saved each game, he says. 
But the strike could cost each team a big chunk of the $1.9 million it takes in each week from national television money, gate receipts, luxury boxes, parking and concessions and local radio outlets. 

   Players have also groused about losing big paychecks and, possibly, income from outside endorsements. 
James Steiner, an agent for players, doesn't think that will happen unless the strike "becomes a long, embroiled situation and gets ugly with strikebreaker games and players fighting among themselves." 

   Still, rumors of cracks in the players' claims of solidarity have abounded. 
One rumor -- staunchly denied by all concerned -- is that the Chicago Bears gave the union a week to settle the strike before walking back in. 
Some players, including the Jets' Mark Gastineau, have said they will continue playing. 

   Fans registered their displeasure at Monday night's game by loudly booing the players' pre-game solidarity handshake and chanting "Strike! 
Strike! 
Strike!" after an uninspiring first quarter. 
Fans also registered complaints with their dollars. 
During the 1982 strike, they bought far fewer souvenir items, a small, but growing source of NFL revenue. 
Thomas Shine, president of Logo 7 Inc., a large NFL licensee, estimates that the last strike cost his company $2 million. 

   A battle appears to be brewing over whether the networks will carry the league's nonunion games. 
NFL officials say the networks must carry the games if they are offered, but some network officials say their commitment to carry such games is unclear. 

   Meanwhile, CBS says it is considering college football games, professional golf, boxing matches and sports anthology shows as possible long-term substitutes for NFL games. 
A spokesman for NBC says that, so far, the network has only ruled out picking up games from the Canadian Football League, which NBC did during the 1982 players' strike. 
Beyond Monday, ABC's plans are uncertain, a spokesman says. 
In 1982, ABC broadcast movies throughout the strike. 

   Such network schedule changes likely will throw advertising contracts into turmoil. 
When the networks sell commercial time to advertisers, they typically guarantee them that their messages will reach a certain number of viewers. 
If those targeted audience levels aren't met, the networks must compensate advertisers with free, or "make-good" advertising. 
Advertisers will spend $500 million this year in network advertising to reach the large number of male viewers that professional football attracts. 

   With recent sales of sports advertising time rebounding from stagnant levels of the past two years, network officials report that most commercial time for NFL games is sold out. 
One reason: Network forecasts of larger television audiences for football appear to be on target. 
ABC's first Monday Night Football game scored a strong 41% share of the prime-time audience. 

   But network and advertising officials doubt that nonunion games or substitute programming will attract similar audiences. 
Thus, they are bracing for negotiations on placing make-good advertising in alternative shows -- a move that may be difficult because network advertising is nearly sold out for non-sports programming as well -- or for demands of cash rebates. 

   Network executives say, however, that they are protected from large advertising losses. 
Under the networks' new contract with the NFL, the league must reduce the amount of the broadcast rights fees the networks pay them by the estimated loss of advertising revenue. 
In 1982, the NFL cut its rights fees by $110 million because of the players' strike. 
"It's not easy to identify your estimated losses, however," one network official says. 

   Network executives are more concerned about the long-term effects of a strike. 
They note that after the 1982 strike, viewing levels for football didn't recover to 1981 levels for several seasons, a reduction they attribute in part to fan and audience backlash over the strike. 

   "Nobody is jumping around here excited about what is happening," says a CBS official. 
"It's not going to be fun." 

   ---

               Battling Over the Free-Agent Issue
   The NFL Players Association has proposed that any player,
after four years of service and regardless of salary, may
become a free agent and sell his services to the highest
bidder. Moreover, the player's new team wouldn't have to
compensate his old team in the form of draft choices. By
contrast, NFL owners propose that players become eligible for
free agency after two years (as it was in the last agreement)
but that teams would still receive some compensation for
losing players under a complicated formula. Some examples:
    Player's Annual Salary:    $120,000
    Years of Service:          4 years
    Current System:            Player's former team receives
                               third-round draft choice
    Owner's Proposal:          Player's former team only
                               has "first-refusal" rights*
    Players' Proposal:         Former team receives no
                               compensation
    ---
    Player's Annual Salary:    $210,000
    Years of Service:          7 years
    Current System:            Player's former team receives
                               first-round draft choice
    Owner's Proposal:          Player's former team receives
                               fifth-round draft choice
    Players' Proposal:         Former team receives no
                               compensation
    ---
    Player's Annual Salary:    $450,000
    Years of Service:          10 years
    Current System:            Player's former team receives
                               two first-round draft choices
    Owner's Proposal:          Player's former team receives
                               one first-round and one
                               second-round draft choice
    Players' Proposal:         Former team receives no
                               compensation
   ---
   *Under the owners' proposal, a free agent's current team
would retain the right of "first refusal," the ability to
match the salary offer of another team under certain
conditions of salary and years of service. The players want
to eliminate first-refusal rights.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
