ID: 238	RANK: 26	SCORE: 8.472258
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880517-0081 </DOCNO>
<HL> Sports Leagues Increasingly Put Retail Licensing on Starting Lineup </HL>
<AUTHOR> Hal Lancaster (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> RET </IN>
<TEXT>
   Enter the stadium and step out on an artificial-turf playing field. 
Browse around a concession stand and pick up a cap or a jersey or tickets to a future game. 

   Just don't expect to see an actual game here. 

   This proposed "stadium" is professional sports' latest -- and perhaps splashiest -- foray into retailing: The Baseball Clubhouse stores, being developed by the major leagues in a partnership with W.C. Bradley Co. of Columbus, Ga. 
The first clubhouse store is scheduled to open later this year in Oakland, Calif., and if all goes well, as many as 20 could be operating by the end of 1989. 
But some retailers and manufacturers warn that baseball's adventure in retailing could backfire, creating problems for everyone in the sports-licensing field. 

   Baseball's clubhouse experiment spotlights the growing importance of retail licensing throughout the professional-sports industry. 
Sports licensing now brings in an estimated $1 billion to $3 billion annually. 
Though it remains a distant second in the $50 billion-a-year licensing field to character licensing -- mainly of cartoon and movie characters -- the appeal of licensed sports merchandise is growing as leisure time, spendable income and media exposure increase. 
"It's virtually impossible to not have sports as part of your life," says Ralph O. Irizarry, senior executive for sports at Licensing Co. of America, which handles licensing for the National Hockey League. 

   At least professional sports teams certainly hope so. 
That's a far cry from a few years ago, when professional sports organizations were hardly paying attention to retail licensing. 
As long as TV revenues continued to climb, they hadn't much motivation to pursue the market. 
And without prodding from the leagues, retailers rarely carried more than a few T-shirts and sweatshirts bearing the local team's name. 
"The leagues and retailers always felt it was a kids' business," says David A. Beckerman, president of Starter Sportswear. 

   Sports licensing began to pick up in the early 1980s as fan shops, which specialize in merchandise bearing team logos, began to spread. 
The success of those small stores prompted big mass merchandisers to also carry more licensed sports goods. 
And the development of "authentics" -- licensed duplicates of gear used by the pros -- resulted in an upscale line of licensed products appealing to affluent baby boomers. 
Now, says David S. Mitchell, director of apparel licensing for NFL Properties Inc., the National Football League's licensing arm, "we cross every demographic market that exists." 

   The interest in licensing also has been spurred by the need to find other sources of revenue. 
Baseball owners, for instance, face the possibility of costly new bidding wars for free-agent players and a cut in network television proceeds. 
As the TV-network gravy train has slowed, league officials have started pursuing the retailing market more aggressively -- recruiting professional retailers to run licensing operations, for instance. 

   The leagues' increased attention to retailing has paid off. 
Retail sales of National Basketball Association goods reached $250 million last year, after climbing at least 50% in each of the previous five years. 
The National Hockey League's sales last year climbed to more than $50 million. 
And baseball soared to $450 million in 1987, from $90 million in 1980. 

   But retailing can be as risky as a knuckleball pitch with the bases loaded. 
Already sports retailers are warning that teams may risk overlicensing their names and insignias. 

   These days, sports fans can get everything from key chains to football-helmet-shaped furniture to the $5,500 NFL beaver coat in last Christmas's Neiman-Marcus catalog. 
Basketball junkies can slam dunk their dirty clothes through a hoop into an NBA hamper. 
The NFL is considering a line of high-fashion evening wear. 
There are limits, though; Mr. Mitchell passed on NFL toilet seats "for taste reasons." 

   Some licensees say the market is being flooded with marginal products. 
The number of NFL licensees has climbed to 250 from 100 just 10 years ago, one licensee complains. 
The NFL's Mr. Mitchell replies: "We've got a long way to go before we're overlicensed." 

   Some retailers also are concerned about the unchecked spread of franchised fan shops. 
The leagues and teams shouldn't put themselves "in the position of (giving licensing rights to) too many people and losing the integrity of the product, and we can't sell it on every corner in every store of America and lose the value," says Mr. Beckerman of Starter Sportswear. 

   Baseball's plans for the clubhouse chain have contributed to fears of a shakeout. 
"There are too many people dividing the pie," says Michael Lewis, former head of Adidas U.S.A. Inc.'s apparel division and who now is starting his own retail business. 

   But such concerns haven't stopped other fan shops from expanding. 
With so many shopping malls in the U.S., "there's plenty of room" for more fan shops, says Gary Adler, chief executive of the 65-store Spectathlete, which got its start seven years ago. 
Merle Harmon's Fan Fair, founded by the sportscaster in 1977, is "looking intermediate term at 400 stores before we stop to take a breath," says Robert L. Pagel, president and chief executive of the 82-store chain based in Milwaukee. 

   Other leagues also are undeterred as they consider following baseball's lead. 
The NHL wants to expand distribution of its licensed goods, and starting its own stores is one of the ideas being considered, Mr. Irizarry says. 
The NBA is encouraging teams to open stores. 
The NFL also has considered its own retailing venture but isn't eager to battle existing fan shops, Mr. Mitchell says. 

   Baseball's clubhouse plan takes the leagues directly into the operating of retail outlets -- something no league has tried before on such a wide scale. 
Brad Plumley, who heads up both the proposed baseball clubhouse stores and W.C. Bradley's 23-store Sports Fantasy chain of fan shops, is aware of the potential pitfalls. 

   The clubhouse shops, which will be named for the home team in each major-league city, will be 2,000 to 2,500 square feet, about twice the size of most fan shops, and "won't be inexpensive to build," he says. 
Although Sports Fantasy stores can turn a profit on sales of $300,000 to $400,000 a year, the clubhouse shops will need sales of more than $500,000 because they will be more expensive to build and operate. 
The stores also will face stiff competition for mall sites. 
Sports fan shops "only get one location per shopping center," says Mr. Plumley. 
"We're kind of like a pet store." 

   And the clubhouse shops will need to sell merchandise from other sports in order to make enough money. 
"We can't run a 12-month business on a seasonal product," says Richard E. White, vice president of Major League Baseball Properties. 
It isn't clear, though, whether fans will think of turning to the baseball clubhouses for football jerseys. 

   Some retailers and licensees wonder whether the baseball leagues will hurt themselves in the long run by competing with shops that currently sell about 25% of the sport's goods. 
"Once (baseball's) stores are around, why should other stores keep carrying their items?" says Mr. Lewis. 

   Mr. Plumley doesn't agree. 
"I suppose there are always going to be retailers that are going to say you've been my supplier and now you're my competitor, but I don't think the better retailers will be that shortsighted," he says. 

   The league's Mr. White promises that the clubhouse stores won't seek preferential treatment from its licensees. 
"We have to be very careful to be nothing but honest competitors," he says. 

   But the clubhouse chain will have some advantages. 
Mr. Plumley says the stores will offer actual game-day souvenirs that won't be sold elsewhere -- lineup cards, broken bats, baseballs, for instance. 
And what other fan shop can command as much free advertising, from plugs on the thousands of games broadcast each season to store appearances by star players to recognition on stadium scoreboards? 

   "This is the single most unique concept in this industry," Mr. Plumley says. 

   ---

                     Sports for Sale
   Estimated retail sales of licensed products for the four major U.S. sports leagues (in millions of dollars)
                                     1988*   1987    1986
    National Football League         $500    $450    $350
    Major League Baseball             650     450     280
    National Basketball Association   250     150      80
    National Hockey League             75      50      40
   *Projections
   Sources: National Football League, National Basketball League, Major League Baseball, Licensing Company of America.

</TEXT>
</DOC>
