ID: 238	RANK: 42	SCORE: 8.180746
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870415-0056 </DOCNO>
<HL> Cable Crossroads: ESPN Will Soon Learn
Whether NFL Football Can Score Profits
---
By Hal Lancaster
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CCB
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   For months, William Grimes has been telling anyone who would listen that the National Football League would be the hottest piece of programming ever to hit cable television. 

   Now that ESPN Inc., the cable sports network Mr. Grimes heads, has won a piece of the professional football pie, will his prophecy hold true? 
Stay tuned for about eight months. 
By then, cable operators, advertisers and ultimately, the viewing public will let Mr. Grimes know if he is a visionary. 

   For now, he is basking in the considerable glow cast by the biggest programming jewel in the history of cable television. 
"The NFL remains, year-in and year-out, the most watched sport on television," says ESPN's president. 
"It's the only sport that hasn't been on cable." 

   In the current television market, however, prestige takes a back seat to profits. 
When ESPN's sales force starts swarming on cable operators and advertisers next Monday with the network's plan for televising 13 Sunday night games -- including four pre-season and eight regular season games plus the Pro Bowl -- the network will begin finding out whether it can make money on the NFL. 

   "We'll make money," Mr. Grimes says. 
"Not a lot . . .." 

   ESPN only got the NFL because the crummy market for sports advertising caused the three broadcast networks to lose an estimated $75 million on NFL telecasts last season. 
When they insisted on cutbacks in the NFL's lifeline -- the rights fees that provide about 60% of each team's revenue -- the league turned to ESPN, which is 80%-owned by Capital Cities/ABC Inc., to make up the difference. 

   The network was happy to oblige. 
Landing the NFL just about completes ESPN's transformation into a major programming force from what a rival cable operator once described as "24 hours a day of underwater Australian wrist wrestling." 

   But unlike some high-exposure sports such as college football and professional hockey, ESPN's Australian Rules Football and fishing shows make money. 
The network will charge its affiliated cable systems extra for the NFL package in hopes that the revenue will cover the $153 million rights fee it paid for three years. 
Still, for the network to turn a profit after a production and promotion budget estimated by some at $10 million this season, advertisers will have to pay more than they ever have for commercial spots on cable. 

   Cable operators will be the network's first target. 
They currently carry ESPN into 38 million homes. (Another three million satellite-dish owners get the service free; that will end in mid-June when ESPN begins scrambling its signal.) 

   A bigger audience base means higher advertising rates and lower costs to the operators, Mr. Grimes explains. 
If all the affiliates sign up for the NFL package, he estimates, they will pay an added 10 cents a subscriber each month to ESPN; if only 70% sign on, the fee goes up to 15 cents. 

   Mr. Grimes argues that system operators will recoup their investments from local advertising-ESPN is alloting them 40% of the games' commercial rights, twice as much as usual -- as well as from new subscriptions. 

   ESPN says its telephone survey of non-cable subscribers in cable-connected areas projects a one- to two-percentage-point gain in market penetration because of the NFL. 
"That could be a substantial increase in revenues," Mr. Grimes says. 

   Still, larger cable operators are expected to drive hard bargains. 
Some have already asked for a share of the revenue ESPN will get by selling local broadcast rights to over-the-air TV stations in the participating teams' markets each week. 
The NFL demanded the local-rights sales to avoid stirring up antitrust sentiment in Congress. (In the event that the home team doesn't sell out at least 72 hours before the game, both the local outlet and ESPN will be blacked out in that city.) 

   In preliminary talks with cable operators, Mr. Grimes says, "we have said we will consider giving back a certain part of that money, since it does diminish somewhat the value of the package to the operators." 
Most are expected to sign up. 

   Says Barry Frank, a television consultant and former network executive: "I don't think any cable operator in his right mind will be able to resist the will of the people in his area. 
As soon as people realize they're not getting these games, it will be a cause celebre and people will be storming the station." 

   The network hopes to reach most of the larger operators by mid-May; then, ESPN will offer all-day presentations at the fiveday National Cable Television Association convention in Las Vegas in hopes of reaching the rest of the industry. 
By June or July, he says, the network needs to know its audience base so it can begin serious negotiations with advertisers. 

   ESPN's sales department is already fielding calls from advertisers, particularly after the announcement last week of what looks like a strong schedule, featuring eight of last year's ten playoff teams and several other perennial contenders. 
The network expects as much as a 10.0 rating for its eight regular-season games (one rating point equals 411,000 homes for ESPN), which would top its previous high rating of 8.0 for a St. John's-Georgetown University basketball game. 

   The highest advertising rates ever charged by ESPN were $12,000 to $14,000 for a 30-second spot on its prime-time college-football telecasts. 
For the NFL, ESPN will seek $40,000 to $50,000 for a 30-second spot. 
By comparison, ABC is expected to ask $200,000 for a 30-second spot on Monday Night Football. 
Last season, the weak market forced ABC to sell some spots at a discount. 
Mr. Grimes says ESPN's cost to advertisers of $10 to $11 per thousand viewers will be comparable to ABC's. 

   ESPN officials hope that because it plans to sell only 60% of the games' commercial time itself -- 36 half-minute-spots -- national advertisers will be standing in line to get the limited time. 
But some advertising agency officials argue that it may be difficult to draw a big audience to a third Sunday football slot that competes against the networks' prime-time schedules. 
And half of ESPN's regular season games will involve teams from one of the three largest television markets. 
Sale of those rights to local carriers could diminish the value of ESPN's commercial time, they say. 

   "I just think $40,000 is a lot for them to get," says Paul Isacsson, executive vice president of the Young &amp; Rubicam agency. 
Mr. Grimes counters that even in the worst case less than 10% of ESPN's overall audience base will be affected. 

   Another agency executive wonders whether advertisers will rob Peter to pay Mr. Grimes. 
"Am I going to take it from my network scatter budget, my prime-time or sports budgets or my cable budget?" he asks. 
"I don't think you're going to see many advertisers say we're going to make new money available to ESPN. Somebody's going to be a loser." 

   ---
   Sunday Night Football
   ESPN's regular-season schedule of NFL games. 

  Nov. 8     New England Patriots at

             New York Giants
  Nov. 15    L.A. Raiders at
             San Diego Chargers
  Nov. 22    Miami Dolphins at
             Dallas Cowboys
  Nov. 29    Cleveland Browns at
             San Francisco 49ers
  Dec. 6     Chicago Bears at
             Minnesota Vikings
  Dec. 13    Denver Broncos at
             Seattle Seahawks
  Dec. 20    Washington Redskins at
             Miami Dolphins
  Dec. 27    L.A. Rams at
             San Francisco 49ers

</TEXT>
</DOC>
