ID: 238	RANK: 43	SCORE: 8.144106
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880225-0061 </DOCNO>
<HL> Courts End Run the Law in NBA, NFL Cases </HL>
<AUTHOR> Gary R. Roberts </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> LABOR </CO>
<G> JUS </G>
<TEXT>
   Are we a nation governed by laws or judges? 
While the issues of this great debate are complex, one cannot deny an unfortunate tendency of many federal judges to decide cases based on personal policy preferences. 
This is well illustrated in antitrust cases challenging the draft and reserve rules of professional sports leagues. 

   Player-union antipathy for these rules, which limit the ability of players to choose the team they will play for, has resulted in bitter collective bargaining, strikes and antitrust lawsuits. 
Such suits are pending in New Jersey against the National Basketball Association (Bridgeman v. 
NBA) and in Minneapolis against the National Football League (Powell v. 
NFL). 
Preliminary rulings in both cases indicate that, as in earlier cases, the law may not determine the result. 

   Three federal statutes unequivocally require that labor disputes be resolved by collective bargaining, not in antitrust courts. 
The 1914 Clayton Antitrust Act states that "the labor of a human being is not a commodity or article of commerce," and thus restraints only on labor cannot be subject to antitrust attack. 
The Norris-LaGuardia Act of 1932 expressly prohibits federal courts from entering injunctive orders in any "case involving or growing out of a labor dispute." 
And the 1935 Wagner (or National Labor Relations) Act, as amended by Taft-Hartley in 1948, mandates that employers and employees bargain in good faith over all "terms and conditions of employment," and that the government and its courts refrain from any substantive involvement in that process or the resolution of such matters. 

   The law could not be clearer. 
Disputes between employers and employees must be worked out in private collective bargaining, with each side using whatever economic or political leverage it can muster. 
Employers can lock employees out. 
Employees can strike. 
Both sides can appeal to public and political sentiment. 
The union can ask its sympathizers to use their influence in bringing pressure on management. 
Short of committing unfair labor practices, each party may do whatever it can to improve the final agreement. 

   But Congress has thrice prohibited federal courts from resolving such labor disputes or involving themselves in the bargaining process under the guise of a claimed antitrust restraint of labor, even if the court believes the relative bargaining strengths to be unequal or any agreement reached to be unfair to either side. 

   The Bridgeman and Powell cases would not be the first instances of courts disregarding the law in order to aid professional athletes. 
In the mid-1970s, a federal court held in Mackey v. 
NFL that the old NFL reserve system (the "Rozelle Rule") violated the antitrust rule of reason. 
To get around the three statues that ban such suits, the court stated that the proscription on judicial interference in labor disputes applies only if the union has included the reserve rule in a collective-bargaining agreement. 
Without such a union agreement, the court said, courts are free to intervene. 
The union subsequently agreed to a modified reserve rule, so Mackey was not appealed. 
Since then, various courts have reiterated the Mackey ruling in upholding restrictive player rules contained in collective bargaining agreements. 
It was never clear, however, how the contrived Mackey limitation on the bar to judicial interference in labor disputes would apply after a CBA had expired. 

   The current NBA and NFL player suits were filed in the hope that a judge would compound the Mackey error and intrude into the private labor-management process after, as well as before, the collective bargaining agreement. 
Since the players in the NBA and NFL suits could not win everything they wanted in collective bargaining after their old agreements expired, they now want an antitrust court to give it to them. (To enhance the chance for success, the NBA players even temporarily decertified their union to make the Bridgeman case appear less like a labor dispute.) 
Early rulings in both cases suggest a judicial willingness to disregard the law again. 
These rulings state that the ban on judicial involvement in shaping employment terms (the so-called labor antitrust exemption) disappears as soon as it becomes clear either that the league cannot obtain union consent for its rules (the NBA case) or that the parties are at a bargaining "impasse." 

   There is nothing in the language or underlying policy of the three proscriptive statutes that justifies either of these limitations on the exemption. 
It is judicial arrogation of lawmaking power in clear disregard of congressional enactments. 
Further, these new "interpretations" create incentives that are destructive of the congressionally mandated bargaining process. 

   If, as the courts ruled, the exemption ends as soon as the parties reach some kind of stalemate, no players union will ever make any compromises or concessions in bargaining. 
A union will take the hardest line at the bargaining table, never budge, and when the inevitable impasse is reached, it will ask the courts to give them what they couldn't achieve through the process mandated by the labor laws. 
Employment terms won't be hammered out at a private bargaining table, as the National Labor Relations Act requires. 
Instead, either they will be imposed by antitrust courts after the union has forced an impasse, or they will be dictated by the union because a hostage management cannot risk the possibility of an enormous antitrust judgment. 

   Perhaps the greatest irony is that the courts have subverted the collective-bargaining process and three federal statutes in order to assist workers who as a group probably are the highest-paid salaried employees in the world. 
In any other industry, employees know that gains can be achieved only through hard bargaining, mutual compromise, flexing of economic and political muscle, and perhaps even a strike; but in the end the terms of employment will be established by private agreement. 
Steelworkers, mineworkers, millworkers, and the like know that what they get they get only by sticking together and winning it at the bargaining table. 
There is no hope that a federal court will step in and give them what they can't bargain for because the judge thinks it's more fair. 

   Only professional athletes, who are in the least need of such judicial assistance, can get courts to give them more than they can lawfully obtain in good-faith bargaining. 
It's no wonder that the NFL players deserted their union and caused last year's strike to collapse; they might win all they wanted in the courthouse at no cost or sacrifice. 
It makes one wonder why they ever went out on strike at all. 

   It is curious at best that federal judges find it appealing to subvert three statutes and undermine collective bargaining to benefit highly paid athletes. 
But whatever their motivations, these cases are further evidence of the often-voiced view that we are indeed becoming a nation ruled by judges instead of law. 
It is just this type of judicial usurpation of legislative authority that causes an erosion of public confidence in the federal judiciary. 

   ---
   Mr. Roberts is a professor at Tulane Law School. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
