ID: 238	RANK: 48	SCORE: 8.054691
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870213-0019 </DOCNO>
<HL> NFL Flirts With Cable as It Begins
Negotiating New Broadcast Deal
---
By Hal Lancaster
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CBS GE CCB
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Does the National Football League's enormously successful television recipe need to be spiced up? 

   For nearly two decades, the NFL has mixed a shot of CBS, a dash of ABC and a pinch of NBC to brew a very rich alphabet soup. 
The last contract for broadcast rights, for example, a five-year pact that expired after the Super Bowl last month, brought in $2.1 billion from the networks. 

   But now, with serious negotiations on a new contract beginning, the chefs at the NFL may add a little HBO, ESPN or WTBS to the stock. 
All three are products of cable technology -- heretofore an unknown concept in the NFL universe -- which could make these the most complex and significant negotiations in league history. 

   While the inclusion of cable stations is far from certain, the mere fact that the NFL is considering such radical tinkering illustrates how times have changed for both the league and the broadcast industry. 
Five years ago, the NFL was the unassailable crown jewel of highly profitable network sports divisions. 
Negotiating a television contract was simple then: After a few cozy lunches with network executives, Pete Rozelle, the league's commissioner, got pretty much whatever he wanted. 

   Since then, however, NFL ratings have foundered. 
Why? 
Everybody has an explanation: overexposure, predictable and repetitive play, overpaid athletes striking for more money, drug problems, image-tarnishing litigation, bad karma. 
Whatever the reason, advertisers fled and network losses on the games grew -- to an estimated $100 million this past season, although the NFL insists the figure was closer to $75 million. 
And so the networks vowed to seek redress through lower rights fees. 

   The decision couldn't come at a worse time for the NFL. 
A recent bidding war for players with the now-dormant United States Football League helped drive up the NFL's costs and narrow its profits. 
Moreover, with ticket prices already high and most NFL stadiums sold out or nearly so, chances of making up the difference at the gate seem slim. 

   Unlike in the past, NFL strategists delayed these television negotiations as long as possible, gambling that ratings would rebound after a three-year decline. 
They did eventually rise, but fell off slightly last season. 
Even the mighty Super Bowl produced lackluster numbers, despite the presence of the New York Giants, a team from the nation's biggest TV market. 

   Of course, the NFL remains a potent ratings draw compared with other sports. 
"It does a consistent double-digit rating," says one advertising agency buyer. 
"The National Basketball Association doesn't do that; regular-season college basketball or football doesn't do that." 
And A.C. Nielsen Co.'s planned switch to "people meter" measuring devices this fall may make the league look better. 
The new meters measure group viewing more accurately than Nielsen's old methods, and the NFL, more than many other types of programming, tends to attract group viewing. 

   Still, the days of doubling rights fees, a common thing in the past, are probably over for the NFL. 
What will they do about it? 
The NFL owners plan to meet in Maui, Hawaii, in mid-March. 
By then, Mr. Rozelle and Arthur Modell, owner of the Cleveland Browns and chairman of the league's television committee, hope to have a package ready that will differ little structurally from previous contracts. 
"But," Mr. Modell says, "there's a better chance than not that there would be a fourth package (for cable). 
We have to look at all our revenues and see that our members are protected." 

   Cable's hopes rest on the reactions of the three over-the-air networks, particularly ABC, which threatened to drop the NFL if the price wasn't right. 
Few of the people involved in the negotiations believe ABC would drop all rights, as that could accelerate the defection of affiliates from the network. 
The "Monday Night Football" show "is the linchpin of ABC's fall schedule," says Peter Lund, who until recently was president of CBS Sports and is currently president of CBS Inc.'s owned-and-operated stations. 
ABC, he adds, "doesn't have a lot of things" that match that program's ratings. 

   But under the cost-conscious tutelage of Capital Cities, its new owner, ABC still could shed its Thursday and Sunday prime-time games, making them available to bids by a cable operator. 
And while network executives downplay the importance of a cable agreement, they have spoken out, warning the NFL about "devaluing" its product through overexposure. 

   Cable also raises antitrust questions. 
Congressional legislation in 1961 granted a special antitrust exemption to the NFL, permitting it to pool its TV rights and sell them on "sponsored" telecasts. 
But does that include such outlets as ESPN or HBO, which didn't exist then? 
Congress intended the exemption to bring more games to free television, not fewer, says Stephen Ross, a former Justice Department lawyer who teaches sports law at the University of Illinois. 

   The NFL now contends that the antitrust laws would apply only where several games are being televised and teams enter agreements carving up territories. 
A "game of the week" on cable, for example, wouldn't raise any antitrust issues, the league argues. 

   But that attitude seems to contradict the NFL's past words and deeds. 
Last year, Mr. Ross says, the league agreed to exclude pay and cable television from the exemption in order to gain passage of a bill that would strengthen its control of franchise relocations. 
The agreement was scuttled when other professional sports leagues objected. 
And in a 1982 Senate hearing, Paul Tagliabue, an NFL attorney, said that "the words 'sponsored telecasting' in that statute were intended to exclude pay and cable." 
He added, though, that it wasn't clear whether the league could pool and sell TV rights to pay and cable networks without an exemption. 

   Despite possible legal challenges, cable has pursued the NFL ardently, with an eye on the coming negotiations. 
ESPN has lined up financial support from cable operators to bid for Monday night football and anything else it can get its hands on. 
Most of those same operators have joined a consortium seeking Sunday night games. 
WTBS has declared itself interested, despite its recent financial woes. 
The USA Network also wants an NFL deal. 
And HBO is independently seeking a Thursday night package. 

   HBO, however, reaches fewer than 15 million of the nation's 87.4 million television homes, and subscribers must pay a premium over the basic cable fee to get it. 
While such conditions appear to make it vulnerable to an antitrust challenge, Seth Abraham, HBO's executive vice president, doesn't see it that way. 
"If the three commercial networks pass on the supplemental package," he asks, "shouldn't the NFL be free to sell a fourth package to someone who wants it?" 

   ESPN, naturally, feels that its sports bent is just right for the NFL. 
And to ease concerns about the national advertising market, it plans to increase the percentage of local advertising run by affiliates during NFL broadcasts to 60% from 20%, something a satellite-beamed superstation like WTBS can't do. 

   And all the cable outlets have one advantage: "We can schedule games at the times the NFL wants," says Rex Lardner, director of sports at WTBS. "ABC looks at Thursday night differently; they're going against Cosby. 
We're an alternative to Cosby; we don't have to have the bulk numbers." 

   Some cable executives, however, argue that a single programming coup -- particularly one that could cost $50 million to $100 million -- won't have much effect on a cable network's audience growth. 
As Terrence J. Elkes, president of Viacom International Inc., asked at a recent conference: With so much college and pro football already on the air, "what's so unique about national football on Sunday night?" 
Viacom, the tenth-largest cable system operator, refused to join the cable consortium seeking an NFL package. 

   Despite cable's bright promise, the NFL may prefer to maintain the status quo a little longer. 
The league's flirtation with cable is seen in some quarters as a ploy to get the networks at least to match last year's rights fee of $495 million. 

   "This," says HBO's Mr. Abraham, "is going to be the greatest poker game in the history of sports television." 

   ---

                         Fewer Viewers
   Average audience ratings for National Football League
games during the past two contract periods.
                    1978-1981      1982-1987
 NETWORK             CONTRACT       CONTRACT       CHANGE
 CBS                     15.8           15.7      - 0.01%
 NBC                     14.1           12.7      - 9.52%
 ABC (Monday)            20.6           18.8      - 8.74%
 ABC (Thursday/Sunday)   19.1           14.7      -23.00
 Note: Each ratings point equals 1% of the nation's homes
with televisions.
 Source: National Football League

</TEXT>
</DOC>
