ID: 238	RANK: 54	SCORE: 8.012821
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871019-0118 </DOCNO>
<HL> Football Fallout: End of Strike
Isn't End of Sports-Labor Turmoil
---
By Hal Lancaster
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/19/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> LABOR </IN>
<TEXT>
   Is it over? 
Is the football strike really over? 
Can we all look now? 

   That depends on what you hope to see. 

   If you're waiting to see the returning strikers play, tune in next weekend. 
After all, the 24-day walkout that added some new terms to the National Football League's lexicon -- most notably "replacement teams" -- did indeed end late last week, when players returned to camp without a labor contract, without any bargaining gains and without much pride. 

   But if what you really want to see is peace on the sports-labor front, you've got a much longer wait coming. 

   In the football battle, the bickering sides will face off again soon in a Minneapolis federal court over the union's antitrust suit. 
The union also has charged management with unfair labor practices before the National Labor Relations Board, alleging management's refusal to play the strikers yesterday and tonight constitutes an illegal lockout that will cost union members $20 million. 
Both sides somehow still hope to cut a deal on a new labor pact, although talks haven't resumed. 

   Moreover, the union's humbling defeat at the hands of a unified management playing labor hardball may also foreshadow tougher days ahead for the players' counterparts in basketball and baseball. 
Legal specialists, for instance, don't expect the NFL union to prevail in its lawsuit -- and believe the suit will make it tougher for the National Basketball Association's players' union to win a similar lawsuit it has filed. 
The NFL union's retreat also raises the risks for sports players that management will continue to effectively use replacement teams to quash strikes. 
And the football players' defeat raises a troubling question for all player unions: How committed will professional athletes actually be when the going gets tough? 

   With the high salaries being paid to top athletes these days, "you have relatively contented athletes who aren't fighting for their precious liberties any more," says Randal Hendricks, a sports agent. 
"That doesn't mean they won't fight, but you have to pick your battles carefully." 

   The big loser for now, though, is the NFL Players Association -- whose members lost more than $80 million in pay during the strike -- and its chief, former all-pro tackle Gene Upshaw. 

   Critics contend the union underestimated management's financial power and overestimated its members' commitment to the issue that prompted the strike-free agency. 
Gary Roberts, a Tulane University law professor and an authority on sports-labor law, also criticizes union leadership for failing to provide for its players financially, either through a strike fund, a line of credit or by delaying the strike so players could collect more pay. 

   Union leadership also misjudged the impact of the cash flow provided by the replacement games. 
Attendance and ratings did fall, but not as much as the union had hoped, and the networks continued to subsidize the substitute games (although network sources estimate that more than half the rights fees for the past three weeks of replacement games will eventually be refunded by the owners). 

   The NFL Management Council's sevenmember executive committee also kept a tight rein on its members, says Leigh Steinberg, a sports attorney and agent, "which enables management to speak with one voice that tends to be constituted of some of the toughest and shrewdest negotiators they have." 
By contrast, the union was plagued throughout by widespread reports of deep divisions among its staff, player representatives and members. 

   Having called off the strike, the union's last resort was the lawsuit and many legal experts believe that has little chance of success. 
They say that the courts have generally ruled that the issues involved in the NFL labor impasse are subjects for the collective-bargaining process and are thus exempt from the antitrust laws. 
"The suit's only value was as a bargaining chip," says Mr. Roberts. 
"They're left with no leverage and a dog of a suit." 

   Meanwhile, sports authorities are just beginning to assess the impact of the strike's failure on other sports -- and initial betting is that it doesn't bode well for the players. 

   The NFL's suit, for instance, may hurt a similar suit filed in New York federal court earlier this month by the NBA players' union. 
The basketball union chose to file its suit early on and forego -- at least for the time being -- a work stoppage. 
Its suit, sports-law specialists say, contains the same inherent weakness as the NFL suit -- that is, it focuses on issues normally reserved for the collective-bargaining process. 
However, by filing the suit before negotiations reached an impasse, the NBA union hoped the courts wouldn't view the issue as a collective-bargaining dispute. 

   "There's always a chance if you draw the right judge under the right circumstances," Mr. Roberts says. 
Now, he adds, the NFL's failed strike underscores for the courts that this is a collective-bargaining issue. 
"The way the NFL's suit was filed, coming at the end of a disastrous strike, is going to weaken the NBA's efforts to win its suit," Mr. Roberts says. 

   But at this point, athletes may have few alternatives. 
For one thing, the NFL strike is a clear sign that players are losing their taste for the picket lines. 
As salaries soar, union militancy subsides. 
And strikes are especially costly to athletes, who are paid seasonally rather than year-round; thus, each week's paycheck represents a big chunk of a big income. 

   Did the NBA union opt for the courtroom because its members, whose average pay tops $500,000 a year, wouldn't stand still for a strike over free agency? 
"You have to think that basketball people, after watching the football situation, reached that conclusion quickly," Mr. Hendricks says. 

   The NFL's successful use of replacement games to break the strike also could prove to be a role model for other sports. 
Both basketball and baseball, for instance, have organized minor leagues already operating. 
"In our case, the Continental Basketball Association is a source of players and really, you only need nine or ten players on a team for a decent game," says Russell Granik, executive vice president of the NBA. 

   If NFL owners, through replacement teams, have devised a strike defense, that would be especially bad news for the baseball union, which has used the strike effectively in the past. 

   After the 1985 strike, owners effectively shut down what had been the most unrestricted market for free agents in sports simply by refusing to bid on players. 
An arbitrator recently ruled that a violation of the collective-bargaining pact. 

   The arbitrator's remedy isn't expected until early next year, but baseball sources think he will encourage both sides to settle the issue themselves. 
That would mean reopening collective bargaining, at least on the free-agency issue. 
The current contract doesn't expire until 1989. 

   Baseball sources expect extremely tough negotiations. 
But will baseball players, who make more than $400,000 annually on average, be any more likely to strike over free agency than basketball and football players? 
Most observers aren't sure, but Mr. Hendricks, the agent, hopes so. 
The other major sports haven't had meaningful free agency; baseball has. 
"When a union wants to push players onward and upward, they're going to have trouble," he says. 
"But (players will) fight to keep what they've already gained." 

   The big risk for everybody in sports is that the fan will grow weary of people fooling with his fun and games. 
NFL officials say it took the league three years to win back fans after the 1982 strike. 
And consider this latest tidbit, from Sidney Shlenker, owner of the NBA's Denver Nuggets: During the NFL strike, he said in answer to a question at a recent luncheon, even his Nuggets suffered -- season ticket sales dipped 50% compared with the comparable, year-earlier period. 
And that in the face of an overall increase in season-ticket sales for the franchise. 
Similar fates befell other NBA teams, he said. 
"I think people are getting fed up with labor-relations problems in sports," he concludes. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
