ID: 238	RANK: 58	SCORE: 7.959949
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870904-0045 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
College Football: Keeping 'em Barefoot
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 09/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   College football begins in earnest this weekend, but the customary celebratory atmosphere is lacking. 
The men who roam the sidelines wearing headphones and worried expressions (they're called coaches) now have a larger concern than how their pizza franchises are doing or what they'll wear on their Sunday-morning TV shows. 
It's that some of their players may begin being paid by check sooner than they expected. 

   The case that has them riled is an offshoot of a Chicago grand jury investigation into the dealings of player-agent partners Norby Walters and Lloyd Bloom. 
Those guys made loans to a number of top collegiate football and basketball players with the understanding that they would be repaid when the lads turned pro under their guidance. 

   One trouble was that so-called student-athletes must take a kind of vow of poverty when they accept college scholarships, so they blew their college athletic eligibility when the loans became public knowledge. 
Another stemmed from allegations that Messrs. 
Walters and Bloom resorted to threats and beatings to keep some signees in their fold, and that anti-fraud statutes may have been violated. 

   It's worth pointing out that it's the alleged fraud and rough stuff -- repeatedly denied by Messrs. 
Walters and Bloom -- that the grand jury is looking into, not the loans to athletes themselves. 
Giving or receiving such payments run contrary to no commandments save those of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, which regulates college sports. 

   Two of the recipients of the Walters-Bloom largess were noted undergraduates Cris Carter, a wide receiver from Ohio State University, and Charles Gladman, a running back from the University of Pittsburgh. 
Deprived of their final year of college-football eligibility, they applied to earn some legit cash for their exertions by joining the National Football League. 
The NFL has scheduled a special draft for today to accommodate them. 

   Some college coaches have reacted as though the league were welcoming the dregs of the nation's penitentiaries. 
Michigan football coach and pizza magnate Bo Schembechler was quoted in Sports Illustrated as saying that the NFL is telling college players to "go ahead and rob, steal, cheat and kill. 
Then as soon as you're declared ineligible, don't worry, because you'll get into the NFL." 
Others, including Pitt's Mike Gottfried, said they would ban pro scouts from their practice fields. 

   In its turn, the NFL declares it derives no pleasure from the windfall. 
"We scheduled {today's} draft reluctantly," says a spokesman. 
"We believe it is best for players to be exposed to the college atmosphere as long as possible." 

   Anger and piety aside, though, it's hard to find anyone who is acting honorably in the Carter-Gladman affair. 
The true stake is the decades-long gentlemen's agreement between the NFL and the college powers-that-be that has kept all but a handful of football-playing collegians from turning pro before their four-year use to their schools is exhausted. 
The pros get a free farm system that supplies them with well-trained, much-publicized employees. 
The colleges get to keep their players the equivalent of barefoot and pregnant. 

   John C. Weistart, professor of law at Duke University and a frequent critic of big-time college sports practices, calls the arrangement "the longest-running antitrust violation going." 
He adds: "We hear a lot about a litigation glut, but where's a lawyer when you need one?" 

   In fact, our other major professional sports leagues already have bowed to the dictates of law and equity in this matter. 
The National Basketball Association has been open to undergraduates since a 1971 lawsuit forced the issue. 
Currently, any player whose high-school class has graduated and who gives the league 45 days' notice is eligible to be selected in its annual amateur draft. 

   Big league baseball, which unlike other sports enjoys a specific antitrust exemption, still allows youngsters to become pros via its June draft after their high-school classes graduates, after any junior-college season, 120 days after completing their sophomore year at a four-year college, or anytime after turning 21 years of age. 

   The NFL's use-up-your-college-eligibility-first rule has little to do with education; it's a player's class that must graduate, not he, and only about one-third of its gridiron minions sport college diplomas. 
The rule survives mostly because the league has deflected potential lawsuits by bending when the need has arisen. 
Today's "supplemental" draft is only the latest of many like it that have obliged persistent exceptions. 

   It's feared, however, that waiving the rule for technical miscreants like Carter and Gladman might give lots of others the same idea. 
That could do the whole deal in or, (horrors!) raise challenges that could jeopardize the entire institution of the player draft. 
Then the NFL would really have something to worry about. 

   I have never advocated salaries for college athletes, because the long-term value of the scholarships they receive (financial and otherwise) can far exceed whatever pay could be reasonably expected. 
The problem is that the college sports big-timers keep their charges so tied up with practices, games, travel and conditioning that any real classroom education is beyond the reach of most. 

   Until that situation changes -- and trends aren't favorable -- keeping the players the only amateurs in an otherwise thoroughly professional production merely encourages agent "loans" and other shenanigans that occupy the sports-page headlines. 
And denying them the right to quit and try to make an over-the-table buck is intolerable under any circumstances. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
