ID: 111	RANK: 36	SCORE: 6.651595
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880613-0091 </DOCNO>
<HL> Will a High-Tech Bat Lure the Elite to Play Low-Rent Stickball? --- Broomstick's Rival Glitters But a Kid Calls It Weird; Willie Is Not Amazed </HL>
<AUTHOR> Michael Siconolfi (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Suspend Pete Rose, bash Billy Martin, string lights on Wrigley Field. 

   But why mess with the broomstick? 

   It seems that the broomstick is in danger of being swept aside as the official bat of stickball. 
Its challenger is a high-tech, high-gloss aluminum model clearly aimed at coaxing the upwardly mobile crowd into an unabashedly low-rent sport. 

   Stickball -- a street version of baseball that has flourished here since the Depression -- has never been a social climber's game. 
In between the manholes and parked cars, players simply whip back an old broomstick, keep their eyes on a cheap rubber ball and swing for the sewer grates. 
The only penalty is a quick trip around the block for whoever beans the building superintendent. 

   But now comes Martin DiSieno, a 30-year-old elevator engineer from Queens, who, in a bid for marketing stardom, recently recast the broomstick into a sleek cylindrical club called the Quick Swing. 
Buyers already have lapped up 1,000 of them through small sporting-goods stores, and Duffy Lautz, a Passaic, N.J., sporting-goods wholesaler, pronounces it "the BMW of stickball bats." 

   So, can Bloomingdale's be far behind?. 

   "It's appalling," laments Stan Fischler, a broadcaster for television's SportsChannel. 
"Stickball has gone yuppie." 

   Players agree that the Quick Swing probably hits farther than a broomstick or any of the other sticks that tend to crop up in the streets and schoolyards. 
Critics, however, say the new bat is morally equivalent to entering a yacht in a dinghy race or sneaking in a racehorse among the polo ponies. 

   Some also think the Quick Swing's $13 price tag is excessive, considering that stickball bats typically are made from castoff broomsticks. 
The inventor makes no apology for the price. 
"The kids out there are buying $50 sneakers; they're spending megabucks on clothes," Mr. DiSieno says. 

   But some people just aren't buying it. 

   The Gerry Cosby &amp; Co. sporting-goods store beneath Madison Square Garden sold about three dozen during the bat's introduction last year but only a handful this season, according to James Root, the manager. 
At Paragon, one of New York's largest sporting-goods stores, the price has the bats gathering dust instead of customers, a salesman says. 

   The cost issue is further explained by Gloria Faltermeier, a social worker who has shattered a few windows playing stickball. 
"Whenever you break a window," she says, "you have to drop your bat and run." 
And then, usually, you have to buy another bat. 

   Breaking things is part of the game. 
In a typical street version of stickball, players select a sewer grate to serve as home plate while parked autos become the bases. 
In the schoolyard or tenement version, a rectangular home plate/batter's box is chalked on a concrete wall -- pitches falling inside the lines are automatically strikes. 
Batters seek to bash the ball to the most distant car or fence or the highest apartment floor. 

   At least, aluminum bats don't shatter easily. 
In years past, the police often confiscated stickball bats, shoving them into sewer drains and snapping them in two. 
Still, the Quick Swing lacks a certain macho quality. 
Though it would "look good on Wall Street," that bat is "too pretty" for the mean streets on which stickball is played, says New York Mets announcer Tim McCarver. 

   The Quick Swing's one concession to the broomstick is a short, dense wooden handle designed to maximize bat speed (imagine swinging a hammer from the head). 
This design has made a believer of Joe Calisi, a 33-year-old computer programmer for the New York City Transit Authority. 
Warming up on a littered Queens street, he calls the Quick Swing "another piece of the evolution of athletics." 

   But another computer programmer, Justin Vincel of Colgate-Palmolive Co., says: "You shouldn't have high-tech in an old-fashioned game." 
A postal supervisor who played for years on New York's East side says of the bats: "The best use would be to recycle them, like aluminum cans." 

   Mr. Fischler's 10-year-old son, Simon, looks skeptically at the bat and concludes: "Ugh. 
It's weird." 

   The bat jeopardizes a part of baseball history, old-timers contend. 
Former Brooklyn Dodger Roy Campanella reminisces about the days when "stickball was just a five-cent ball and my mom's broomstick." 
Willie Mays, who often played stickball near the old Polo Grounds while he was a New York Giant, frowns as he whips the new bat around. 
He recalls the broomstick stump he used 30 years ago: "Now, that was a hard thing to hit with, man." 

   At the Gerry Cosby sporting goods store, salesman Orlando Torres debates the bat's marketing outlook with the store's manager, Mr. Root. 
Mr. Torres, a former New York Stock Exchange clerk uprooted by the market crash, says many people pick up the bat, swing it, then put it down. 
"Stickball is poor man's baseball," he says."They're trying to make it a money-man's game, and they can forget it." 

   But Mr. Root offers a selling point for the new bats. 
"If you're a kid," he says, "you'll get in a lot less trouble buying a $13 bat than stealing your mom's broomstick." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
