ID: 111	RANK: 39	SCORE: 6.596869
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870225-0171 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
Put Him in the Hall, Specs and All
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 02/25/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The calendar and Midwestern weather say it's February, but with pitchers and catchers assembling for spring training in the sunny climes, it's hard to keep one's thoughts from baseball. 
Two sounds penetrate: the traditional crack of bat against ball (aaah!), and the crunch of the free-agent players' collision with collusion. 

   It is undisputable that freedom should be indivisible. 
It also is indisputable that the team owners have put their heads together on salaries, although they will dispute it. 
At the same time, though, it's hard to work up much sympathy for the players for the simple reason that being richer has not, as a rule, made them nicer. 

   I recall being in the Detroit Tigers' clubhouse after a night game during the team's 1984 championship season. 
Reporters were interviewing a Tiger whose locker was near that of pitcher Jack Morris. 
Morris had his radio on so loud that it was difficult to hear what the other player was saying. 
Someone asked him, politely, to turn it down. 
He turned it up instead. 
This is the same Mr. Morris who, having failed to peddle his talents elsewhere, just won an arbitrator's salary award of $1.85 million for staying in Detroit this season. 

   So for my 1987 baseball commencement column, I will address a happier subject: the question of whether Dominic DiMaggio, the old Boston Red Sox outfielder, belongs in baseball's Hall of Fame. 
The fellow who raises this question is Dick Flavin, a Boston television commentator and speaker-for-all-occasions. 
Not surprisingly, his answer is an emphatic "yes." 

   The "most-underrated" label is the most overworked in sports, but Mr. Flavin does not blush to apply it to DiMaggio, the youngest of the three baseball-playing brothers. 
"He was a wonderful player in every aspect of the game," Mr. Flavin declares. 
"It was only because he played next to one baseball legend -- Ted Williams -- and was the brother of another -- Joe -- that he didn't get the recognition he deserved." 

   Mr. Flavin opines that Dom DiMaggio should be in the Hall if for no other reason than that he wore eyeglasses throughout his Major League career. 
He believes that as the putative National Pastime, baseball has a duty to provide heroes for all groups in our population, and that eyeglass wearers, a sizable bunch, have been sadly neglected. 

   I can only agree. 
An inquiry to the Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., about glasses-wearers among the 161 players enshrined there reveals that only one -- Chick Hafey of the St. Louis Cardinals -- regularly wore specs on the field. 
That is intolerable. 

   Another reason to elevate DiMaggio is that he was a rare athlete who walked away from a pro career instead of being carted out. 
In 1952, his last full season in the Bigs, he batted .294 in 128 games. 
In the spring of 1953, at age 36, he suffered an eye injury, but by opening day reported ready to play. 

   Red Sox manager Lou Boudreau elected to field a younger man. 
After a month on the bench DiMaggio called it quits, surrendering his then-princely annual salary of $40,000. 
"Some guys said they wouldn't have just sat on the bench for $40,000, they'd have sat under it," says the 70-year-old DiMaggio from his winter home in Del Ray Beach, Fla. 
"But I didn't want to hang around if I couldn't play regularly." 

   DiMaggio, of course, has more conventional credentials for Hall membership. 
His effective career spanned 10 seasons over the 13 years from 1940 through 1952, with a three-year break (1943-45) for World War II military service. 
His lifetime batting average of .294 is better than that of 23 non-pitchers in the Cooperstown museum. 

   He averaged 168 hits a year and 62 runs batted in, OK for someone who usually batted leadoff and stood just 5 feet 9. 
More noteworthy are his 1,046 career runs scored. 
Only two Hall of Famers from the modern era -- Lou Gehrig and Joe DiMaggio -- scored better than 100 runs a year. 

   Dom DiMaggio also excelled in a part of baseball often overlooked by the granters of immortality: fielding. 
Twice he led the American League centerfielders in putouts and three times in assists. 

   Bill Deane, a researcher at the Hall of Fame, in his spare time compared the fielding marks of the top centerfielders in baseball between 1935 and 1950, and concluded that Dom was, arguably, the best of his era. 
"Joe got the most credit, but you can make a case that he was the third-best fielder in his family, behind both Dom and Vince," says Mr. Deane, who emphasizes that's his opinion, not the Hall's. 

   Dom came within a step of being the hero of the 1946 World Series between Boston and St. Louis, the only one in which he played. 
The step came as he rounded first base on a double that drove in two runs and tied the seventh game of the series, 33, in the eighth inning. 
It pulled his hamstring muscle and forced him to leave the contest, which placed his sub, Leon Culberson, in centerfield when Enos Slaughter scored the winning run from first base on Harry Walker's single to that field in the bottom of the frame. 

   "I like to think I'd have thrown out Slaughter on that play . . . if he'd had the courage to run on me at all," DiMaggio says. 

   It is irrelevant to his baseball record, but nonetheless interesting, that DiMaggio prospered mightily after he left the game. 
One company he headed, Delaware Valley Corp., makes auto carpeting, and another, Dom DiMaggio Inc., makes foam-rubber products. 
They did well enough to allow him to own a piece of the football Boston Patriots in the 1960s, and to join a group that made a bid to buy the Red Sox a few years ago. 
Both firms are run by his sons while he splits his retirement days between Florida and Cape Cod. 

   DiMaggio never received more than 43 votes of the 270 or so he needed in any year he was eligible for election to the Hall by sportswriters. 
That makes him a long shot to be picked by the Veterans' Committee, which considers players long retired. 

   It's a situation he views philosophically. 
"If I make it, fine, and if I don't, fine, too," he says. 
"The fun was in the playing. 
Anything else would be extra." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
