ID: 111	RANK: 55	SCORE: 6.404666
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880425-0120 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: The National Pastime: Fact and Fiction </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   When neither of New York's Major League baseball entries won so much as a division title last season, the joy in the outlands was accentuated by the expectation that we'd be spared the deluge of New York baseball books with which the big New York publishers always celebrate a New York victory. 

   Hoo boy, were we wrong. 
The mail this spring brought New York baseball books in more than the usual numbers. 
There are biographies of present and former New York Yankees, histories of the old Giants and their leader, John McGraw, and nostalgic looks at "great" Yankee and Mets teams of the not-distant-enough past. 
The only solace is the thought (hope) that this keg has to tap out sometime. 
I mean, about all that's left to write about, New York-wise, is that wonderful season of 1975 when, against all odds, the Yanks bravely struggled home third. 

   My top pick in this spring's baseball-book draft has an apple connection, but not the Big Apple. 
It's "Newton at the Bat: The Science in Sports" (Eric W. Schrier and William F. Allman, editors; Scribner's, 205 pages, $7.95), an expanded, paperback edition of a book that was first published in 1984. 

   The articles in "Newton" touch a wide range of sports, but the most interesting stuff is about baseball. 
One holds that curve balls do curve, but don't "break" the way baseball folklore holds. 
Another disputes the notion that the erratic flight of the knuckle ball depends on the whims of passing breezes. 
Still another questions whether corking a bat really makes a struck ball go farther. 
Just the topics for a good baseball chat around the old Bunsen burner, huh? 

   For more literary tastes, there's "Season Ticket" (Houghton Mifflin, 406 pages, $18.95), the latest collection of Roger Angell's stories from The N-- Y---er magazine. 
Mr. Angell may or may not be "the best baseball writer ever," as the book's publicity contends, but he certainly writes the longest paragraphs. 
His is a leisurely approach to our most leisurely big-time sport, and his pieces are well worth perusing at your leisure. 

   Among the baseball biogs, I blush to admit that I liked "Winfield: A Player's Life" (Norton, 314 pages, $16.95) by Big Dave, the Yankee outfielder, with Tom Parker. 
The book has been in the news almost continuously since its release last month because of its less-than-startling revelation that Dave doesn't like Big George. 
Otherwise, though, it's a warm, well-written and, apparently, candid look at the life and psyche of a fellow who grew up poor and now makes $2 million a year playing ball. 

   A book of a different sort is "Bleep! 
Larry Bowa Manages" (Bonus Books, 298 pages, $15.95) by Mr. Bowa with Barry Bloom. 
It's got to be the first ever about a rookie manager whose team (the San Diego Padres) just finished last. 
It retraces the runty ex-shortstop's life, playing career and managerial woes, alternating chapters of Mr. Bowa speaking in the first person and baseball writer Bloom's third-person accounts of some of the same things. 
As the title suggests, Mr. Bowa's language runs to the foul. 
He also says "hey" a lot. 
But, hey, what the bleep, he's that kinda guy. 

   Two other new releases, "John McGraw" (Viking, 358 pages, $19.95) by Charles C. Alexander, and "The Giants of the Polo Grounds: The Glorious Times of Baseball's New York Giants" (Doubleday, 396 pages, $18.95) by Noel Hynd, cover much the same ground. 
My choice is "McGraw," a biography of the longtime manager of the Coogan Bluffers. 

   Author Alexander is a professor of history at Ohio University, and his relentless pyramiding of facts often gets tedious. 
This is no light read. 
It is, however, an interesting portrait of a strange, mercurial man, and of the moral climate of baseball's early days, when things were quite a bit gamier than they are now. 
For instance, McGraw's one-time partner in a New York pool hall was Arnold Rothstein, whose later business ventures included fixing a World Series. 

   Baseball and its "times" are the focus of three other New York-centered books: "Season of Glory: The Amazing Saga of the 1961 New York Yankees" (Putnam, 320 pages, $18.95) by Ralph Houk and Robert W. Creamer; "Streak: Joe DiMaggio and the Summer of '41" (McGraw-Hill, 260 pages, $17.95) by Michael Seidel; and "A Magic Summer: The '69 Mets" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 309 pages, $16.95) by Stanley Cohen. 
All attempt to place the exploits of a team or individual in the context of surrounding world events. 
None succeeds very well. 

   The juxtaposition works worst, I think, in the book about DiMag's 56-game hitting streak in 1941. 
It was a great baseball feat, all right, but putting it in front of the backdrop of a world plunging toward war makes it look puny. 
The Houk-Creamer chronicle of the Mantle-Maris Yanks of '61 is less heavy-handed with the background material, but turns up little new about this much-covered club. 
It's especially disappointing because Mr. Creamer's previous two works, on Babe Ruth and Casey Stengel, were so good. 

   "Summer" is about the Amazin' Mets' 1969 championship season. 
Mr. Cohen revisits some of the players, a la Roger Kahn's "The Boys of Summer," which was about the 1950s Brooklyn Dodgers. 
Mr. Kahn did it much, much better. 
Nostalgia ain't what it used to be. 

   "It's Anybody's Ballgame" (Contemporary Books, 305 pages, $17.95) by Joe Garagiola is another round of baseball jokes and stories by the garrulous TV announcer. 
Many of them sound familiar. 
"Catfish: My Life in Baseball" (McGrawHill, 242 pages, $16.95) by ex-Yankee and Oakland A's pitcher Jim "Catfish" Hunter and Armen Keteyian is OK jockography with a disconcerting "This Is Your Life" format. 

   "The Crooked Pitch: The Curveball in American Baseball History" (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, 194 pages, $9.95) by Martin Quigley is ostensibly about the curve ball, but it's an entertaining ramble over numerous baseball subjects. 
"The Game for All America" (Sporting News, 256 pages, $35) by John Thorn contains 400 handsome, perhaps too handsome, photos of aspects of the national pastime. 
Baseball fans have coffee tables too, right? 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
