ID: 111	RANK: 63	SCORE: 6.254668
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880608-0031 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: On Sports: Arena Football </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   I saw an Arena football game at Madison Square Garden here Monday night, but went away disappointed. 
I didn't see anyone try a drop kick. 

   I saw about 70 passes and 58 points. 
I saw football players slammed into the boards, hockey-style. 
I saw a man named Knight perform for a team called the Knights. 
I saw a cockroach crawl past my station at the press table. 
It should have been enough, but it wasn't, because nobody tried a drop kick. 

   You must be of a certain age, and then some, to remember the drop kick, so named because the ball has to be bounced off the turf before meeting the kicker's foot. 
It dates from the time when football players were smaller and the ball was larger, or, at least, rounder. 
They used to kick extra points and field goals that way. 
The fella at the National Football League said that, the best he could find out, the last successful drop kick in his loop was an extra point by Ray McLean of the Chicago Bears on Dec. 21, 1941, in the championship playoff against the Giants. 

   I'm a trifle young to have witnessed that one, but I do remember Pat Page, a former University of Chicago footballer. 
He was white-haired and I was a kid of about 12 when we played catch one afternoon in a Chicago park, but when I asked him to throw me a hard one I was almost knocked down by the result. 
He laughed and said that was nothing, watch this. 
Then he drop-kicked the ball through some goal posts about 50 yards distant. 

   Jim Foster, the Iowan who founded and runs Arena football, had a similar memory of his dad's drop-kicking prowess, so he included in the indoor game's rules an incentive for the form's revival. 
You can do that when you invent a game. 
Drop-kicked extra points are worth two points instead of the usual one, and field goals four points instead of three. 
Sure enough, someone drop-kicked an extra point in last year's "preview" season, and this year Dave Jacobs of the New England Steamrollers got a field goal and three PATs. 

   I called Providence, R.I., where the Rollers are based, to speak to Jacobs, but was told he'd been cut after Friday's game against the Chicago Bruisers. 
"His leg was too strong for our building," said a team spokesman."His {place kick} kickoffs kept going into the rafters." 
That has to be a first of some sort. 

   To be sure, there is more to Arena football than the drop kick. 
The red-haired Foster, 37, has put the autumn game through a shrinker so it can be played in places that are air-conditioned. 
Why should fans have to suffer through a football-less spring and early summer? 

   Foster says this thought occurred to him one evening in 1981, when, taking a break from his duties as NFL promotions director, he was watching an indoor soccer game. 
Anything being better than watching soccer, he then and there whipped out an envelope and jotted down some rules for an indoor football game. 

   Most of those dictums remain: Cut teams to eight men from 11; use a 50-yard-by-85-foot field; retain hockey sideboards because they make for interesting collisions; hoist nets behind the end zones to add spice to kickoff and field goal returns (a ball kicked off a net is in play). 
The latter also saves a few bucks on footballs. 

   Foster was sidetracked from putting his plan into action by the formation of the U.S. Football League. 
Not only did that entity pre-empt summer football, but it also furnished him with employment as a team official. 
The USFL folded after a few, fitful seasons, but Foster says his experience there was useful "because I learned what not to do." 
Including: Don't compete with the NFL in any way, shape or form, and schedule only night games so they don't compete with outdoor summer fun. 

   The new league would have to be started on the cheap, which dictated small rosters. 
That dictated one-platoon football, and that dictated more versatile, and usually smaller, players. 
Typically, linemen change roles with ball possessions, backs become linebackers and receivers become defensive backs. 
"We're a throwback to college football in the 1950s, when guys played both ways," says Foster, proudly. 

   Arena football also is a throwback to the '50s salary-wise. 
Players on the six-team circuit's 18-man rosters get $1,000 a week for a 12-week season, plus bonuses for individual and team performance. 
They also receive housing during the April-through-July campaign. 
Some New York Knights have griped that the faucets leak in their digs, but, given Gotham-area rental prices, they're making do. 

   "It's a wide-open game, and fun to play," offers Matt Stevens, a former UCLA star turned quarterback for the Los Angeles Cobras. 
"I'm hoping for another shot with the NFL, but I won't regret this even if I don't get one. 
I'll have plenty of time later to work 9-to-5." 

   Foster sold his idea to the ESPN cable-TV network (natch), and played a four-team, 13-game inaugural last year. 
Attendance averaged 11,300 a game. 
That figure has dropped to fewer than 10,000 for the first six weeks of this season, partly because of competition from the pro-basketball and hockey playoffs. 
The league expects a gate rebound when it faces just dull old baseball in late June and July. 

   Only about 6,500 people showed up Monday to watch the Knights play the Cobras, indicating, I guess, some sour grapes in the Big Apple over the Knights' 1-4 won-lost record going in (and 1-5 going out; they lost, 36-22). 
The crowd looked mostly like high-school and college boys who came over from school and older guys staying in town after work. 
Still, they cheered for the six-week-old home team (aren't sports amazing?) and had fun making patchy waves. 

   The game, with its narrow field and constant passing, reminded me of nothing so much as the touch football I played in the alleys as a kid ("go to the garbage can and cut left . . ."). Come to think of it, that's not a bad idea for a new TV game. 
The telephone poles will be the goal lines. 
No first downs-only touchdowns. 
No out-of-bounds. 
And drop-kicked extra points'll be worth three. 
Alley football! 
ESPN will love it. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
