ID: 111	RANK: 71	SCORE: 6.165240
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870106-0153 </DOCNO>
<HL>
It Began as a Pastime
In Jail, but Racquets
Now Is an Elite Sport
---
It Is Also Perilous, Deterring
Even the Best of Athletes;
Sensation of a Perfect Shot
---
By Amal Kumar Naj
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/06/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   The area formed by the wall in that part of Fleet {prison} in which Mr. Pickwick stood was just wide enough to make a good racket court . . . sauntering or sitting about, in every possible listless idleness, were a great number of debtors . . . looking on the racket players, or watching the boys as they cried the game. 

   --From "The Pickwick Papers" by Charles Dickens 

   NEW YORK -- Gliding and diving, swiveling and ducking, the two men on a cavernous court at the Racquet and Tennis Club here could be mistaken for squash players using a golf ball. 

   The game, however, is racquets -- a sport of considerable contradictions. 
It started in the humbling surroundings of England's debtors' prisons more than two centuries ago, but now it is arguably the game of the world's elite. 

   The domain of racquets once was as wide as the British Empire. 
But now the game is so obscure that it is played by only 200 or so in North America and by an additional 1,500 in British "public" schools and private clubs. 
The secret formula for constructing courts was buried with one family long ago, and the sole supplier of the game's ball is a 73-year-old Englishman who uses production machinery fashioned from bicycle parts. 

   It is now considered a gentleman's game, but racquets is exceedingly dangerous. 
The plastic and nylon ball often ricochets at speeds of more than 150 miles an hour, and it isn't uncommon for players to suffer serious injuries. 

   Danger aside, the game is so exacting that even the best of athletes are easily deterred. 
Yet the combination of all these paradoxical elements has created some of the most passionate and committed sportsmen alive. 

   "There's no money in racquets, the thrill is the speed of the ball . . . the sheer feel of hitting it with precision," says Kenneth Chantler, 76, who retired four years ago after nearly 50 years as the Montreal Racquet Club's racquets professional. 

   One weekend, the Racquet and Tennis Club here is the venue for the first leg of the World Racquets Championship match. 
Consider the scene: 

   Like patrician Romans in the imperial box at the Colosseum, about 150 anxious spectators from both sides of the Atlantic -- racquets-club members only, please -- are crowded in the standing-room-only gallery. 
The conviviality of the previous night's black-tie stag dinner -- a ritual that accompanies every racquets tournament -- has given way to tense moments and expectations of high drama. 

   Below, standing in the slate-gray, warehouse-like court are the world's top two players: Willie Boone, 36 years old and defending his title of world champion, and John Prenn, 33, the challenger. 
Both are Englishmen. 
Mr. Boone, an Eton graduate, is a sales manager for a sporting-goods company; Mr. Prenn, hailing from the Harrow school, is a London businessman. 
They came here a week before the match, traveling at their own expense with coaches and entourages of fans in tow. 

   Mr. Boone wins the initial serve. 
Seconds after he swats the ball to the front wall, the white missile rockets back to his opponent's corner. 
At a dizzying speed it strikes the side wall, then the back wall and then it curves to the cement floor. 
Just as it lurches from the floor, Mr. Prenn is already flanking the ball, having precisely anticipated the missile's bounce and trajectory. 
Mr. Prenn, crouching on bent knees, then smashes the ball with his racket -- called a "bat" -- back to the front wall. 

   As each player tries to render the ball unretrievable for his opponent, the ball caroms and crackles like splattering rifle fire on the walls. 
A "marker," who is one of the four officials supervising the match, shouts constantly, "Play! . . . 
Play!" to signal whether it is safe to hit the potentially lethal projectile. 

   Mr. Boone is renowned for his power, his shots having been clocked at an average speed of 164 miles an hour. (A 90-mph baseball pitch is considered blazing.) 
On the other hand, Mr. Prenn is a finesse player, relying on artistic shots and an ability to retrieve even the most difficult ball. (A player only scores points when he serves; the first player to score 15 points wins the game.) 

   After 3 1/2 hours and two dozen balls, Mr. Prenn -- who won the championship in 1981 but then lost it to Mr. Boone in 1984 -- wins the New York leg, four games to three. 
The next week he is also triumphant in the second and final leg at London's Queen's Club and wrests the title from Mr. Boone. 

   Racquets is the forerunner of all modern court games played with a rubber ball, including squash and racketball. 
It was invented in 1739 as a pastime for idle debtors in the Fleet and Queen's Bench prisons in England. 
Some inmates found the prison's high walls a suitable playing surface for a makeshift ball. 
The game made its way to the back walls of taverns and then to British public schools. 

   But like the empire, racquets has been fading for the last century or so. 
That it has survived at all is somewhat of a miracle. 
Consider the courts. 
About 2 1/2 times as big as a squash court, they are 60 feet long, 30 feet wide and 45 feet high. 
The regulation court is made of cement and graphite mixed in precise proportions and poured only at a specific temperature and in exact lighting conditions. 
Problem is, only the Bickley family and a few employees of that English masonry dynasty knew the formula, and the last of them died in the 1930s. 

   Since then, only a few have tried -- and all have failed -- to build a satisfactory racquets court. 
Thus, only eight North American courts survive, and only about two dozen remain in use in England. 
India at one time had 70 courts, the most of any country, but none are known to be in use now. 

   Then there are the balls. 
Nazi bombings during World War II destroyed the premises where Jeffrey Maling turned out the only balls in the world. 
Mr. Maling -- who made the balls by soaking and compressing felt from soldiers' uniforms, some from the Crimean war, and covering them with sheepskin -- simply gave up the business. 
Edward J. Bailey, who worked for Mr. Maling, took over the business, but he, too, gave up after his facility also was destroyed in the German bombings. 

   William Gordon, an enterprising racquets professional at England's Marlborough College, took over the mantle. 
He uses a plastic core, which he helped develop to give the ball a more predictable bounce and a longer life. 
An automatic winding machine contrived from used-bicycle parts tightly wraps the plastic core with nylon threads. 
The ball, 1 1/2 inches in diameter, is then covered with white tape. 
Today, Mr. Gordon is the sole supplier, turning out 1,500 to 2,000 balls annually. 

   It is said that a player struck by a fast racquets ball could be killed outright. 
There is no evidence of such a fatality. 
However, in the early 1910s, a player at the Montreal club had one of his eyes "knocked out" by the ball, says the club's Mr. Chantler. (The player's only regret: He immediately looked up at the gallery and said with a loud sigh, "Now the ladies won't like me.") 

   In more recent years, Howard Angus, the world champion in the early 1970s, lost his vision for a year after he was hit in the eye, says Mr. Boone, the now-defeated champion. 
Mr. Boone says he himself has required stitches three times. 

   But players seem to feel the game's perils are outweighed by its attractions: the sensation of a perfect shot, like a home run in baseball, or the snap of the ball that sets the court echoing like rifle shots. 

   "I got into racquets because the ball sounds so good against the wall," says the reigning champ, who was a ranking tennis player in his early youth. 
"For me, it was either tiddlywinks or racquets." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
