ID: 111	RANK: 84	SCORE: 6.073460
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881014-0206 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports: Read Their Lips: Dodgers Dun It </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Los Angeles  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In his edifying presidential campaign, George Bush, the candidate of the Republican team, has on occasion invited us to read his lips when he wanted to emphasize a point. 
Always eager to oblige, I turned off the sound on my TV set and attempted the feat. 
I found that Bush is easier to understand with the sound on, but the silence was soothing nonetheless. 

   The subject of lip reading arose again during the National League baseball playoff series between the amazin' and ultimately victorious Los Angeles Dodgers and the New York Mets. 
At a press conference following his team's pivotal 5-4 win in Game 4 Sunday night in New York, Dodger manager Tom Lasorda was asked what he said when he came to the mound to address his pitcher, Jesse Orosco, after Orosco had walked a batter in the 12th (and final) inning. 

   "I read your lips, and you started off with, 'What the heck are you doing . . .'" the reporter began. 

   "What the heck?" interrupted Lasorda. 
"You sure can't read lips." 

   Tommy, indeed, did not say "heck," but a naughtier "h" word. 
He said other naughty words that one needn't have been a skilled lip reader to have deciphered. 
So, too, at various times, did players he manages. 
So did lads managed by Davey Johnson, skipper of the Mets. 
So did Johnson. 
So did the Oakland A's, winners of the American League gonfalon, and their Boston Red Sox foes. 
The baseball bunch also expectorated great, gooey globs of tobacco juice and other substances, and scratched where they itched. 

   I know this because, Seouled out from three weeks of Olympics fun, I stayed home and watched the first few games of the playoffs on television. 
ABC-TV took its cameras into the dugouts so that we home fans could witness, via tight closeups, our heroes' habits and verbal ejaculations. 
To say they were a contrast with the goings on at the Games would be to put it mildly. 
Janet Evans wouldn't think of cursing or chewing in public. 
Neither would Greg Louganis, I'm sure. 

   I offer the preceding strictly as an observation, being fully aware that cussin' and spittin' are as much a part of baseball as the runner taking out the pivot man on the double play. 
We the People apparently are eager to share in these aspects of our national pastime. 
A spokesman for commissioner Peter Ueberroth said his office had received no complaints about ABC's intimate coverage, and that Mr. U had no plans to counsel NBC, which will air the World Series, to act differently. 

   "We are concerned about the image of baseball. 
If there's a problem, we'll do something. 
But there's no problem," the spokesman said. 

   So if funk is to be the theme of the World Series that begins here tomorrow, Dodger slugger and left-fielder Kirk Gibson may well be its star. 
Here's a guy who personifies grit and spit. 
He has no widely known nickname -- big guys like him often don't sit still for one -- but "Dirt" would fit nicely. 
It even rhymes with Kirk, almost. 

   Focus in on the Dodger strong boy, as the TV camera frequently does, and you're more likely to see his lips form a "bleep" than a "good evening." 
His favorite expression is a snarl. 
He thinks the best time to shave is last Tuesday. 
His body and uniform usually are soiled from inning one; showers and laundries were invented with people like him in mind. 

   "When Kirk came here from Detroit he brought his will to win with him," notes teammate Orel Hershiser, pitching hero of Game 7 Wednesday night, won by the Dodgers, 6-0. 
He also brought his will to throw bats, batting helmets and anything else handy when he strikes out, but it's part of the same package. 

   Gibson's availability against Oakland in the coming Twilight Zone series (all games save one are scheduled to begin at 5 p.m. local time) will depend on the condition of a hamstring muscle he strained in Game 5 of the Mets' go. 
He did it trying to steal a base with his team ahead by two runs in New York. 
He'd previously hit a three-run homer in that contest -- the margin of victory in a 7-4 win -- after beating the Mets the night before with a home run in the 12th. 

   He listed through Game 6 like a man just home from several months at sea, and was pulled after inning two in Game 7 after the Dodgers had taken a decisive lead. 
Lasorda says he'll play tomorrow "if he can run." 
Make that crawl. 

   It's worth noting that Gibson's two home runs accounted for half his hits in the Mets' series, in 27 times at bat. 
That works out to a .148 batting average and, at the least, bespeaks the resourcefulness that fueled his team's triumph. 

   That's as good an explanation as any of how the Dodgers beat the Mets, hailed by most and sundry as the league's best going into the playoffs. 
Against such Mets stars as Darryl Strawberry (39 HRs, 101 RBIs) and strikeout ace Doc Gooden, the Dodgers fielded pitchers named Holton, Horton and Howell, a catcher (Mike Scioscia) whose name defies both correct spelling and pronunciation, and utility infielder Mike Sharperson, who probably was called Sharman before the language went unisex. 

   It was a series that turned on Scioscia's ninth-inning home run against Gooden in Game 4, which changed a 4-2 Mets lead, and likely three-games-to-one series edge, into the 12-inning Dodger win that evened things. 
Scioscia had recorded only 35 home runs in a nine-season big league career, and his hit was the first solid blow off Gooden that night. 

   Also typical was the five-run second inning that ensured Wednesday's fourth and last Dodger victory. 
It came on four singles -- one of them a blooped bunt -- two Met errors and a couple of walks. 
"It wasn't exactly an artillery barrage, but the runs looked good," said Hershiser, who went all the way in his third start of the playoff. 
He added: "There's nothing like a six-run lead to pick up a tired pitcher." 

   Whether more of the same will suffice against the A's remains to be seen. 
That gang, whose stars and stats outshine even those of the Mets, flattened the Red Sox four straight in the AL tourney, and it would surprise few if they treated L.A. similarly. 
But Gibson should have a few things to say about that, even if they aren't printable. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
