ID: 111	RANK: 85	SCORE: 6.071084
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880318-0104 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports: Baseball and Roller Coasters </HL>
<AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Baseball City, Fla.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Before getting to the meat of this story, the aim of which is to tell how and why the Kansas City Royals came to be conducting their spring training in an amusement park, I feel that a word of explanation about the above dateline is in order. 

   There is, in fact, no such city as "Baseball City, Fla.," but the alternatives to using it struck me as less palatable than this mild deception. 

   The tract of land in question sits at the intersection of Interstate Highway 4 and U.S. Highway 27 in unincorporated Polk County, midway between Lakeland and Orlando in the central part of the state, but that description is so bulky as to be off-putting. 
The name of the amusement park is Boardwalk and Baseball, but that would be overly commercial and no more informative since it, too, is on no maps. 

   Some newspapers, in an attempt to avoid the wordiness/commercial dilemma, are using the dateline of Haines City, the nearest legal burg. 
But that's 10 miles to the south, and using it misleads and inconveniences anyone driving there expecting to see a ball game. 

   "It's also a problem for us," admits Dick Howard, Boardwalk and Baseball's president. 
"We got the county to declare us 'Baseball City' because it's catchy, but people say they have to ask all sorts of directions to get here. 
We just hope the problem goes away as they get used to coming." 

   They'll also have to get used to hearing the screams of the folks riding the roller coaster a few yards from the spiffy new ballpark B&amp;B built for the Royals. 
We Americans are adaptable, so chances are that we will. 
At any rate, whether you believe baseball and roller coasters go together like apple pie and ice cream, or like apple pie and sauerkraut, the combination is here to stay for the term of the Royals' 15-year lease. 

   The Royals moved to Baseball City this spring from Fort Myers, Fla., for the same reason that four other Major League teams (the Texas Rangers, Houston Astros, Cincinnati Reds and New York Mets) have shifted their spring bases in the past two seasons: They received an offer they couldn't refuse. 
And in each case, the offer was pretty much the same: A state-of-the-art training and exhibition-game facility in return for little more than the exertion required to sign on the dotted line. 

   The number of teams making similar moves seems sure to rise as more Florida communities, including some that actually appear on the map, mount bids to snatch a slice of the spring-training grapefruit, worth between $10 million and $15 million each spring per team in sales of food, booze, gas, lodgings and suntan oil to baseball-starved Northerners. 
Among the clubs currently being wooed are the Minnesota Twins, New York Yankees and Chicago Cubs. 
If an old-timer napping in his $2 grandstand seat once symbolized the activity, $7 box seats and ticket-scalpers do now. 

   The Rangers (Port Charlotte), Reds (Plant City) and Astros (Kissimmee) all moved to facilities built and paid for by Florida cities or counties eager to entice tourists. 
The Mets are the come-on for a planned residential development that aims to triple the population of Port St. Lucie, a town of 15,000 between Fort Pierce and Vero Beach on the state's east coast. 

   All received a stadium, major- and minor-league clubhouses, indoor-batting and pitching areas and a four-field cloverleaf of practice diamonds that a manager can oversee from an observation tower, a la Bear Bryant. 
They pay little or no rent, and get to keep a goodly share of ticket and concession revenues. 
"It's the best deal in town. 
You can't beat it with a stick," observes Tom Kindred, assistant administrator of St. Lucie County, which manages the Mets' facility for the firm that built it. 

   The Royals' deal with Boardwalk and Baseball is about the same, the main difference being that the landlord is an amusement park. 
The link was the corporate brainchild of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc., which also owns the Sea World and Cypress Gardens parks. 
It bought the former Circus World park here in 1986 and spent a year and $24 million installing a baseball motif. 
About $13 million of that sum went into the Royals' complex. 

   When the big-leaguers aren't in residence, baseball will be supplied by the Royals' Class A minor-league team the company also purchased, and by games between local high schools, colleges and kids-league contestants. 
Contests matching two "house" teams manned by local aces filled open dates last winter, but they might not be needed this year. 

   B&amp;B's Mr. Howard avoids calling his a "theme" park. 
"We're a traditional amusement park with a baseball dimension -- two entities in one," he asserts. 
"They're compatible, but you can enjoy one without the other." 
The distinction mirrors the park's ticket policy for spring training and minor-league games, which enables customers to attend the games and park separately or together in complex price combinations. 
He notes, though, that at other times "baseball is thrown in free, like the whale show at Sea World." 

   Having his sport classed with Shamu doesn't bother Royals' general manager John Schuerholz. 
He is too busy being "ecstatic" about the facility. 
"We couldn't ask for more because they did everything we asked," Schuerholz says. 
"B&amp;B came to us and said, 'Design yourself a baseball complex.' 
We did." 

   All the practice fields have the same dimensions as the team's Royals Stadium home, and the 7,000-seat main field has the same brand of artificial-turf infield. 
Schuerholz's enclosed box here views the playing field from the same angle as his seat in KC. 

   Oh, there have been a few problems, like having to dial 11 numbers to phone the minor-league players' hotel across the street from the team's office, and the steel-tube roof support that flapped loose on a windy day last week while the Royals were playing Toronto. 
But nothing's perfect. 
"I've even gotten used to the roller coaster," says Schuerholz. 
"It's better than some other ballpark sounds I've heard." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
