ID: 111	RANK: 94	SCORE: 6.025075
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870424-0157 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- On Sports:
The Fan-atic Hall of Fame
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 04/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   This is an age of excess, so it is appropriate that a contest has been raised to celebrate that dubious tendency. 
I am speaking of the first Sports Nut of the Year award, which will be conferred the night of Monday, May 4, in a Manhattan bar called (what else?) 
Sports. 

   The sponsor of the thing is Fisher Nut Co., of Fullerton, Calif. 
You get the connection, don't you? 
Of course you do. 

   In January, Fisher put out a call for nominations, and was quickly swamped by a tide of pathology. 
A Washington man boasted, "I'm the one who takes the wife to the hospital early for the birth of our first child because I have a game to play." 
An Iowa woman pleaded, "My husband only watches TV if there's at least two people and a ball on it. 
He has his own yellow flag for football. 
We can go anywhere on vacation as long as there's a ballpark there. 
Please take my husband." 

   One would think such examples would prompt immediate calls to the mental health authorities and a merciful end to the proceedings, but the Fisher folks read on, through some 1,500 entries. 
The field was winnowed to six finalists, who will have it out in the bar before a panel of judges headed by Dick Vitale, the yammering basketball commentator. 

   Vitale will be joined by Lou Carnesecca, who practices gymnastics on the sidelines while he coaches basketball at St. John's University, and Jim Burt, a defensive lineman for the New York Giants who celebrated his team's victories in the late pro-football playoffs by swapping high-fives with fans. 
Bob McCoy, a writer for the Sporting News, also is a judge, but his qualifications aren't so obvious. 

   The decision of the judges will be final, of course, but I still thought you might like to meet the finalists and peruse their bona fides. 
Also, if you are forewarned, you might be able to avoid them if you're ever at the same party. 

   You probably won't have trouble spotting Greg Lockhart, because he's likely to be in costume. 
He's a rotund, 38-year-old barber and all-around Boston fan from Wilbraham, Mass., who once dressed as a basketball and dribbled one the 91 miles from his home town to Beantown before a Celtics game. 
He has donned a red body stocking for Red Sox baseball games and affected colonial garb in honor of the football Patriots. 

   "I'm also into costumes around my shop," laughs Greg, who laughs a lot. 
"I've cut hair as Miss Piggy, the Great Pumpkin, Santa and the Easter Bunny. 
Seeing the smiles on people's faces is what it's all about. 
Getting a chuckle out of someone makes my day." 

   Eric Anderson, 28, of Milwaukee, likes to dress up, too, but his repertoire is more limited than Lockhart's. 
Wearing sunglasses, hard hat, cape, and T-shirt advertising the local team-in-season, he fancies himself "The Spirit" of Milwaukee sports. 
He attends several dozen Brewers baseball games a year, as many Bucks (basketball) and Green Bay Packers (football) contests as he can manage, and watches "wall-to-wall" sports on TV at night. 
He says he took his part-time job as a messenger for a title company because it leaves him ample time to spectate. 

   The San Diego Chicken is Anderson's idol, and he aspires to become the Brewers' official mascot. 
The team has not cooperated, once threatening to get a court injunction to curb his grandstanding. 
He is dismayed, but not discouraged. 
"I hope if I hang in there and be loyal, they'll give me a chance," says he. 

   Mike Zimmerman is a 31-year-old high school baseball coach who lives in Temple City, Calif. 
He's so crazy about baseball that he staged his wedding on the diamond of San Francisco's Candlestick Park. 
A face-mask-wearing rabbi officiated, and bride and groom exited through a archway of bats hoisted by friends. 

   Francesca Campanella, 28, of Key Biscayne, Fla., also loves baseball, and last summer drove 11,500 miles to witness games in 15 different Major League stadiums. 
She's a Dodgers fan, but says it's the game itself that attracts her. 
"I love its beauty and subtlety, and the variety of the ballparks," she says, sounding suspiciously sane. 
She also confesses to such non-sports hobbies as music, theater and piloting airplanes. 
What's she doing in this contest? 

   Matthew "Pop" Shortell, of Ansonia, Conn., is a 64-year-old father of 11 and, probably, the nation's busiest sports official. 
Among other things, he has umpired more than 15,000 baseball or softball games, refereed another 15,000 basketball games, and held the first-down markers at 300-odd Ansonia High football contests. 
He also has found time to watch or listen to just about every New York Yankee baseball game for the last 50 years. 
"Sports keeps me young," he chortles. 
"I'm 64 going on 19." 

   Tony Arduini, a 34-year-old salesman from Gaithersburg, Md., witnessed 454 straight Baltimore Orioles baseball home games between 1979 and last year. 
His streak ended when he chose to attend a Washington Capitols hockey playoff game instead. 
He has missed two Caps home games in the last eight seasons, and has a string of 113 Washington Bullets basketball games going. 

   "I've been that way all my life; when I lived in Jersey Shore, Pa., I'd drive seven hours to see games in Baltimore or Pittsburgh," says Arduini. 
"It's like an addiction, really. 
Last year, after baseball, I experimented by trying a couple of weekends without sports. 
I wasn't happy." 

   The finalists get a trip to New York and dinner with Vitale, who promises to let them speak, a little. 
First prize includes a color TV, VCR, reclining armchair and a year's supply of nuts. 
In keeping with the contest's spirit, Fisher should require that the nuts be eaten in a single evening. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
