ID: 111	RANK: 99	SCORE: 5.998670
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890911-0121 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890911 </DD>
<AN> 890911-0121. </AN>
<HL> Soccer Still May Be King in Europe
@  But Fans Are Going Nuts for Baseball
@  ----
@  By E.S. Browning
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 09/11/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> EUROP </CO>
<TEXT>
   Like most European teen-age boys, Raphael Escoffier has a passion. 

   But unlike most of them, his passion isn't soccer or teen-age girls. 
It is baseball. 

   "It has an American prestige," says the curly haired 16-year-old, who is attending a baseball tournament near Paris. 
"I play in a French junior league. 
This summer, when my family visited the U.S., I got to play with people there. 
I loved it. 
American sports are becoming popular across Europe." 

   Anyone who doubts that need only have driven last week to the Paris suburb of Savigny, which could have been mistaken for suburban New York or Chicago. 
The French government has built a regulation-size baseball diamond in Savigny and teenagers showed up to watch games in caps and warmup jackets emblazoned with New York Mets and Chicago Cubs logos. 
They watched intently as slightly older players from European national teams took to the field, and listened to sounds dear to American hearts. 

   "Hit one out of there, Henrik]" bellows a Dutch player to a colleague, who is batting. 
"You're ready for the baths, Henrik]" responds a British adversary. 
Henrik hits a single through the infield. 

   This is Eurobaseball, the 21st European baseball amateur championship tournament, hosted by France. 
Never mind that Holland, Europe's powerhouse, demolished Britain 35-0 in one of the early games, in a sport whose scores are more likely to be 53. 
Never mind that British players, short of sponsors, have to buy their own food during the tournament. 
For these teams, and for the fans who found their way to Savigny's Jean Moulin Memorial Park, nothing beats the old ball game. 

   In the U.S., baseball may be troubled by gambling and drug scandals. 
But in Europe, it is becoming the stuff of dreams. 
Ten years ago, the fledgling French baseball federation had just 500 players. 
This year, the federation boasts 10,000 players, and the Dutch say they have three times that many players. 
Baseball isn't exactly challenging soccer's supremacy but Finland, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union all have baseball federations. 
With baseball slated to become a full Olympic sport at the 1992 Barcelona games, European countries are investing more in the game. 

   Michael Warme, a 16-year-old French boy, attends a game decked out in a red, white and blue Montreal Expos cap and red warmup jacket, worn over his red and white Savigny boys' league uniform. 
On his jacket collar are pins with the emblems of the St. Louis Cardinals, New York Mets and Atlanta Braves. 
He discusses the game with a friend who wears a Cubs warmup jacket. 

   Many French teen-agers say they were drawn to the game because of the exotic uniforms and equipment. 
"For Christmas, my father bought me the basic equipment -- a bat and a glove," says Michael. 
"Then we looked for a place to learn to play." 
Neither father nor son knew much about the game but today Michael pitches and plays shortstop for Savigny. 

   Raphael Escoffier, who plays right field for the Paris University Club, one of France's leading junior teams, takes the sport so seriously that he and teammates practice all winter in a gymnasium. 
"We work mostly on defensive moves," he says, "and we take batting practice, hitting the ball into a net." 

   The Dutch, who have imported U.S. coaches since 1962, are even more avid. 

   "When the first U.S. navy ships arrived in Rotterdam harbor after World War II, the Americans quickly formed a team and beat the Dutch. 
But those days are over now," says Huub Kohl, who coaches an amateur team in Rotterdam. 
His son helped pitch the Dutch to a 3-0 victory over Belgium. 
"We play three times a week, Friday night, Saturday and Sunday, and we practice twice a week. 
We do very well." 

   The Dutch had a team in last year's Seoul Olympics, in which baseball was a demonstration sport, and they now stand No. 1 in Europe and No. 8 in world amateur rankings. 

   "We tell people, 'There are riots at soccer matches now but in baseball we are one big happy family,'" says Jan van der Sande, a Rotterdam baseball official. 
"We have hot dogs and we all know each other." 

   In the 1950s, the two Dutch officials say, amateur sports clubs in soccer-mad Holland introduced baseball so they wouldn't have to close their social centers in the summer after soccer season ended. 
Marcel Krudt, a 27-year-old Dutch outfielder who sells restaurant equipment, began playing baseball to stay active after the soccer season ended in April. 
Now he doesn't have time for soccer. 
Asked whether his friends think it is funny that he switched to a foreign sport, he doesn't smile. 

   "No they don't," he says. 
"We play at a pretty high level." 

   Not everyone in Europe does, of course. 
The British already have a summer sport, cricket, and they have taken to the faster-paced American sport with less relish. 

   In the British-Dutch game, for example, British wild pitches and errors abounded. 
A Dutch runner scored when the umpire got in the British catcher's way, and the Dutch hit so many home runs that both sides lost count. 

   The Italians, Europe's other powerhouse, went on to win this year's tournament, defeating Holland 7-5 in the final game. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
