ID: 280	RANK: 68	SCORE: 13.853010
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890818-0114 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890818 </DD>
<AN> 890818-0114. </AN>
<HL> Medical Clash:
@  Expansion of Hospitals
@  Into New Territories
@  Draws Local Staff's Ire
@  ---
@  The Cleveland Clinic's Branch
@  In Florida Is considered
@  A Threat by Doctors There
@  ---
@  Competing for New Patients
@  ----
@  By Ron Winslow
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 08/18/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<IN> HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA) </IN>
<GV> FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC) </GV>
<DATELINE> FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   For years, Ohio's Cleveland Clinic has ranked with the top world-class providers of medical care. 
It pioneered coronary bypass surgery and developed the first kidney dialysis machine. 
King Hussein of Jordan uses the clinic, so too the royal family of Saudi Arabia. 

   But to Diran M. Seropian, chief of the medical staff of the largest hospital in Broward, County, Fla., the clinic is the Carl Icahn of medicine -- "a hostile corporation with a hostile corporation mentality." 
Its unforgivable mistake, in Dr. Seropian's view: It opened an outpatient facility here 18 months ago as part of a plan to expand into this market. 
Local politicians and businesses cheered the idea. 
But many local physicians were outraged, and an extraordinary campaign to keep the clinic out was begun. 

   The battle between the Cleveland Clinic and the South Florida physicians is part of a larger war sweeping the health care industry and can ultimately be boiled down to one issue: competition. 
Big-name health-care institutions are after new markets for their state-of-the-art medicine, and are posing a new threat to local physicians. 
The expansions are also disrupting traditional relationships between physicians and their patients, physicians and their hospitals and physicians and their fellow physicians. 

   In the Cleveland Clinic's case, Carl C. Gill, the chief executive of the Clinic's Florida enterprise, and a surgeon who has done 4,000 open-heart operations, was denied local hospital privileges. 
The credentials committee of Broward General Medical Center said he lacked enough experience in the emergency room, among other things. 
In fact, for 15 months, the clinic was blocked from conducting heart surgery in Florida. 
When one hospital finally opened its doors, some local physicians, apparently in protest, began snubbing the facility and referring their patients elsewhere. 
And when some patients told their local physicians that they wanted to consult physicians at the clinic, they were handed their medical charts and told not to come back. 

   In a recent full-page advertisement in the Miami Herald, Dr. Seropian, who has led the charge, pulled out the stops. 
He likened the clinic to Dingos -- wild Australian dogs -- "that roam the bush eating every kind of prey." 

   In May, the clinic filed suit in federal district court in Fort Lauderdale, charging, among other things, that some physicians had conspired to "hamper" its entry into Broward County. 
In a countersuit, Amjad Munim, a pulmonologist and one of two individual defendants named in the complaint, maintained the clinic had tried to recruit him to spy on his fellow physicians so it could build a legal case against them. 
Meanwhile, the Federal Trade Commission is investigating whether the battle has involved violations of antitrust laws. 

   The Cleveland Clinic, which had revenue of $672 million in 1988, isn't alone in its desire to expand. 
The Mayo Clinic, based in Rochester, Minn., has recently set up satellite operations in Jacksonville, Fla., and Scottsdale, Ariz. 
The M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston is negotiating to open a branch in Orlando, Fla. 
Several other, smaller institutions and academic centers have also established regional branches, intended to feed patients to their main facilities. 

   In part, these institutions are victims of their own success. 
Many once-exotic procedures that they invented are now routinely available across the country, reducing the need for patients to travel to the medical meccas. 
For instance, the Cleveland Clinic might once have had a hold on coronary bypass surgery, but no more: Last year more than 250,000 patients had the operation at hospitals throughout the U.S. 

   "These clinics used to be the court of last resort for complex medical cases," says Jeff Goldsmith, national health-care adviser to Ernst &amp; Whinney, the accounting firm. 
"Now, the flooding of the country with medical specialties and high-technology equipment has forced them to adopt a different strategy." 

   Their expertise and reputation spell formidable competition for the local medical community. 
On one level, says Jay Wolfson, a health-policy expert at the University of South Florida in Tampa, "it's like bringing in a McDonald's. 
If you're a mom-and-pop sandwich shop on the corner, you could get wiped out." 

   In Fort Lauderdale, physicians insist they aren't threatened by the Cleveland Clinic. 
Instead, they say they resent what they see as special favors the institution was given to invade their turf. 
They also maintain the clinic will lure fully insured patients from local hospitals, leaving behind the burden for indigent care. 
And they bristle at the suggestion that the clinic dispenses a better brand of medicine. 
"They've implied the doctors here are dummies, that they're bringing enlightened medicine to the hinterlands," Dr. Seropian says. 

   Since its founding in 1921, the not-for-profit Cleveland Clinic has built its business taking on complex, high-risk cases, and leaving more routine primary care to family physicians. 
In addition to treating patients, its salaried physicians do research and train new physicians, tasks the clinic says set it apart from everyday medical practice. 
"Basic fee-for-service practice doesn't advance medicine," says Dr. Gill. 

   Clinic physicians claim they aren't interested in stealing patients. 
But they make no apology for provoking a battle with their fee-for-service brethren that is both cultural and economic. 
Says Dr. Gill: "Let's let the marketplace sort out what the best way to deliver health care is." 

   The conflict began early in 1986 over modest ambitions: a proposed joint venture between the clinic and the North Broward Hospital District, a tax-supported agency that operates Broward General and three other county hospitals. 
Under the plan, the clinic would build an outpatient facility adjacent to Broward General Medical Center. 
The medical center would provide surgical and other major services. 

   But word of the idea leaked prematurely and a hastily-arranged meeting to explain it to the district's physicians erupted into a verbal pummeling of William Kiser, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation board of governors. 
Soon after, hospital officials halted the negotiations. 

   "The {physicians} really had a problem with a bunch of carpetbaggers from the North," Dr. Kiser said. 

   The clinic, however, moved ahead with its expansion plans. 
Like any business, it keeps close tabs on its core market, and the outlook wasn't all that bright. 
Seven states provide 90% of the clinic's business and population growth in that region is expected to be flat through the year 2000. 
But not so southeastern Florida, where the population is still growing and, in many areas, is highly affluent. 

   On the surface, the region -- Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach Counties -- is a dream market. 
Yachts lining the canals of the Intracoastal Waterway and a ubiquitous building boom reflect wealth and growth so palpable that clinic officials have come to call it "immaculate consumption." 
Moreover, about 20% of the 3.7 million residents in Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties are over 65 years old. 
By the year 2000, about 50% of the population will be over 45 -- a potential motherlode of patients. 

   "We felt there was room for us," Dr. Kiser said. 
"We decided to go on our own rather than wait to be invited." 

   Others have been drawn by the same flame. 
Throughout the 1970s, for-profit hospital chains rushed here to cash in on the growing elderly population, whose medical tab was paid in full by Medicare. 
But in 1983, when the U.S. instituted new medicare payment guidelines called DRGs, or diagnosis related groups, to control surging medical costs, hospital occupancy rates began to plummet. 
Now, the region is glutted with health care: There are 240 physicians for every 100,000 residents in southeastern Florida -- the national average is 189 -- and a surplus of 3,500 hospital beds. 

   Glut or not, the clinic drew up big plans: a $200 million complex, anchored by a state-of-the-art, 400-bed hospital. 
Health planners blanched, but the business community was enthralled. 

   "We looked at this as a world-class health facility that we would use to build business around," said James Garver, president of the Broward Economic Development Board. 

   In May 1987, with help from a politically connected law firm and after some of its physicians had made about $2,000 in campaign contributions to local legislators, the clinic won passage of crucial legislation: a law granting it tax-exempt status and waiving the state medical exam for 25 senior physicians who would move from Cleveland to launch the new facility. 

   Local physicians were enraged. 
"Twenty-five thousand physicians have taken that exam to practice in this state," fumes Dr. Seropian. 
The Cleveland physicians shouldn't have been exempted, he says. 

   The clinic says it received the same consideration previously afforded the Mayo Clinic and academic institutions hiring out-of-state faculty. (Ultimately, 13 of its physicians accepted exemptions before the waiver expired.) 

   With the bill's passage, the clinic pressed forward to build its outpatient facility, which opened in February 1988. 
But more battles loomed. 
For one, to build its proposed hospital, which it hoped to open in the early 1990s, the clinic had to get a "certificate of need" from the state, proving that the community actually needed the services. 
The local hospital association and health planners allied with local physicians to oppose it. 

   The clinic's physicians meanwhile had no place to operate, and started hunting for a hospital that would open its doors. 
The clinic found two allies, one of which was North Beach Hospital, a 153-bed facility that was filling only 28 of its beds. 
There was just one problem: North Beach lacked a certificate of need for cardiac service. 

   Enter Richard Stull, the chief executive of the North Broward Hospital District. 
Mr. Stull had played a key role in the early joint-venture discussions between the clinic and the District, and he held steadfast to his hope of an affiliation with the clinic. 

   "In this county there are 20 acute-care hospitals that are known for nothing," Mr. Stull says. 
"All I was looking for was adding something so that we'd stand out." 
He was also worried about offsetting competition from a new source: Some of his own physicians were setting up clinics that siphoned off outpatient business from the hospital. 

   When a cardiac team left Broward General at the beginning of 1988, Mr. Stull thought the clinic's heart specialists could fill the void. 
But once again, the hospital's medical staff was opposed. 

   In the resulting battle: 

   --The hospital's credentials committee denied practice privileges to the clinic's five-person cardiac team, including Dr. Gill, because the clinic is "an acknowledged potential competitor" of the hospital, the committee said. -- The district's board, in the face of political pressure, overruled the committee and last January signed a five-year contract with the clinic to provide cardiac services at Broward General. 
In protest, some physicians apparently diverted their patients to other hospitals, helping to depress February revenues at Broward General $3.5 million below projections. 

   --When the clinic asked for privileges for its other specialists to consult on cardiac cases, the local credentials committee refused to act. 
Mr. Stull had to fly in a panel of physicians from outside the area to approve their qualifications. 

   On May 15, more than 14 months after the clinic's outpatient facility opened, Dr. Gill performed the first open heart operation at Broward General for the Cleveland Clinic Florida. 

   But that victory was tempered by a serious setback. 
In January, state health officials denied the clinic a certificate of need for its hospital. 
They said there were already too many surplus hospital beds in the area, and rejected the clinic's claim that it offered unique services. 

   For now, the clinic's hospital plans are on hold. 
But, in the meantime, it says its Florida practice is thriving. 
More than 12,000 patients have sought treatment since it opened; some wait as long as three months for an appointment with one of its 48 physicians. 

   Specialty-care and exotic procedures remain its stock-in-trade. 
In one recent operation, three clinic surgeons replaced a Fort Lauderdale resident's cancerous throat with a piece of his small intestine. 
In another, a physician used two ribs to make a new forehead for a man whose own had been removed to relieve pressure in his brain. 
Then there is Beth Acker. 
Told by a local neurosurgeon that she had an inoperable spinal cord tumor and four months to live, the 29-year-old mother went to the clinic where she had successful surgery. 
"They handled it like an everyday thing," she said. 

   Gradually, local physicians are sending patients its way, the clinic says, but the vast majority come in on their own. 
That is prompting the clinic to expand its services, and add a general medical practice to its group of specialists. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
