ID: 280	RANK: 77	SCORE: 12.883523
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ911030-0172
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
911030-0172.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Medicine:
   Using PCR Gene Technique, Physicians
   Can Diagnose Elusive Diseases Earlier
   ----
   By Marilyn Chase
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
10/30/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1
</SO>
<CO>
   ABT AN EK MTC SGP Z.ROC
</CO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
ENERGY (ENE)
CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)
TECHNOLOGY (TEC)
</MS>
<IN>
CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)
DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)
ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)
MEDICAL SUPPLIES, EYEGLASS MANUFACTURERS (MDS)
MEDICAL &amp; BIOTECHNOLOGY, GENETIC RESEARCH, PROSTHETICS (MTC)
OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)
PETROLEUM (PET)
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)
</IN>
<NS>
PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)
SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)
</NS>
<RE>
EUROPE (EU)
ILLINOIS (IL)
MISSOURI (MO)
NEW JERSEY (NJ)
NORTH AMERICA (NME)
NEW YORK (NY)
SWITZERLAND (SZ)
UNITED STATES (US)
WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)
</RE>
<LP>
   Gene amplification is transforming the way doctors detect
dozens of ailments, including AIDS and cancer.
   The sleuthing technology, known as the polymerase chain
reaction, or PCR, was invented in 1983 by scientists at Cetus
Corp. and sold to Hoffmann-La Roche, a unit of Roche Holding
Ltd. of Switzerland, this summer. Popularized outside
medicine, PCR has yielded genetic "fingerprints" that have
helped to identify criminal suspects, prehistoric animals and
casualties of the Gulf War.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But PCR is opening even more windows in diagnostic
medicine, where its ability to pinpoint genes much more
adeptly and quickly than other methods has aided researchers
in identifying the bacteria, viruses and mutant genes that
cause disease. Starting as early as next year, PCR test kits
may become commercially available to clinical labs, moving
the technology further into the medical mainstream.
   "It's changed the way we think about diagnostic medicine,"
says Jeffrey Cossman of Georgetown University School of
Medicine, which this month co-sponsored a conference on the
explosion in uses for PCR and some of the difficulties in
harnessing the technology.
   PCR involves plucking a gene from a sample of blood or
tissue through the use of DNA probes, which bracket the
target much like bookends, and then replicating it as many as
a trillion times. This bit of medical alchemy permits
detection of one cancer cell in a million, making it 1,000 to
10,000 times more sensitive than earlier techniques. That
helps to alert doctors faster to relapses after treatment and
serves as an early warning system for new viral infections
too recent to have sparked symptoms.
   The speed of the technology tantalizes doctors who track
contagious illness. In the case of tuberculosis, says Jack
Crawford of the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta,
"rapid detection using PCR offers the possibility of early
intervention."
   Certainly, the tool isn't fail-safe. PCR produces swarms
of DNA copies that can overrun lab equipment and taint
results of subsequent experiments, leading to as much as a
30% rate of false-positive readings, warns Arthur Hooberman
of the University of Chicago. Cetus scientist John Sninsky
unveiled a new sterilization technique that can prevent such
contamination. But the opposite problem -- that of false
negative results -- occasionally troubles researchers, too.
   Some researchers also worry about some of the practical
implications of PCR's ability to detect the presence of
disease-bearing genes long before symptoms appear. "The key
question is what are we going to do with all this increased
sensitivity," says Dr. Robert Yolken of the Johns Hopkins
pediatrics department. "Will we diagnose more people who are
sick, or will we find out that everyone is carrying small
amounts of virus and do more harm than good?"
   For several years, PCR has been used to detect genes
responsible for such diseases as sickle-cell anemia. Now,
cystic fibrosis, which damages the lungs, and Fragile-X
syndrome, a type of retardation, have joined the list of
genetic defects that PCR targets. The National Institutes of
Health recently funded a network of cystic fibrosis screening
projects. Johns Hopkins University geneticist Haig H.
Kazazian says he supports similar screening programs for such
blood disorders as sickle-cell anemia and thalassemia, as
well as for Tay-Sachs disease, a fatal enzyme deficiency.
   Oncologists are using PCR to detect cancer-causing genes
as well as microscopic traces of disease that can lead
malignancies to recur after treatment. They can diagnose
certain lymphomas and leukemias based on a telltale switch in
the location of certain chromosomes.
   In the AIDS epidemic, PCR has a half dozen distinct uses,
according to Gerald Schochetman of the CDC. It solved the
problem of diagnosing newborns, who carry maternal antibodies
that mask their condition in conventional tests. PCR can also
detect HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, in newly infected
adults before they make antibodies. Further, PCR can help
track disease progression by measuring how much virus a
patient is carrying.
   PCR is also emerging as a tool for screening donated blood
for HIV. The American Red Cross is planning to use the
technology in its central laboratory in Washington. Says
Gerald Sandler of the Red Cross: "There are 50,000 people to
whom we've said: `You test false-positive so you can't donate
blood.' We'll put in PCR not to detect more {HIV} but to work
toward reinstating those people as blood donors."
   PCR is having a major impact on more common infectious
diseases, too. For herpes virus infections, Thomas Smith of
the Mayo Clinic says, "PCR gives us more diagnostic options"
because it can pick up such hard-to-detect herpes family
members as the Epstein-Barr virus, linked with mononucleosis
and lymphoma, and the papilloma viruses, linked with genital
warts and tumors. Dr. Yolken of Johns Hopkins says PCR can
also detect cases of virusborne diarrhea before antibodies
are produced, making it potentially easier to curb outbreaks
in hospitals and day-care centers.
   For David Persing of the Mayo Clinic, PCR has shed
unexpected historical light on Lyme disease. After combing
through insect museums, he performed PCR on tick specimens
dating from the 1940s, and concluded that the ailment was
around decades earlier than doctors had thought.
   Next month, Roche is launching clinical trials of its
first commercial PCR candidate, a test for chlamydia, a
common sexually transmitted infection, and the company hopes
to file for market approval in the first quarter of 1992.
According to Dr. Yolken, people with infectious chlamydia can
test negative in conventional tests. What's more, the company
says, its test takes only four hours, compared with two days
for other tests.
   Roche has also slated clinical trials for a second
commercial PCR venture, a confirmatory test for HIV, in the
first half of 1992. Further into the future, Roche scientists
are developing a test that can distinguish between the benign
and cancerous types of the papilloma virus.
   Roche says it owns the rights to all present and future
uses of PCR by virtue of a $300 million deal with Cetus in
July.
   Eastman Kodak Co. has asked for a preliminary injunction
to block Cetus's sale of the technology, and a hearing has
been set for Nov. 19 in Delaware. Kodak claims it retained
broad rights to PCR technology from a 1986 contract with
Cetus. Cetus terminated that contract in 1989, when it
licensed diagnostic rights to Roche.
   Would-be competitors are now developing potential
second-generation diagnostic tests similar to PCR. They
include Abbott Laboratories of Abbott Park, Ill., which calls
its technology the ligase chain reaction. Amoco Corp. is
working on another potential contender called
Q-beta-replicase. So promising is the market for such
gene-based tests that Thomas MacMahon, president of the Roche
Diagnostics Group, predicts, "Any major company in the
diagnostics field will want to compete."
   Roche, meanwhile, expects a bonanza from PCR. Mr. MacMahon
predicts that the world-wide market for gene-based diagnostic
tests will reach $500 million by 1995 or 1996 and double to
$1 billion by the year 2000.
   Along with opening up new treatment options for patients,
PCR may also open up business opportunities for drug
companies. Harley Rotbart of the University of Colorado,
Denver, notes that there are 75,000 cases of viral meningitis
and encephalitis annually that can leave their victims --
especially children -- brain-damaged or dead. Because there
was no practical way to test for the enteroviruses at fault
in such cases, a number of companies shelved potentially
helpful drugs.
   With PCR, "now there is a way to test," says Dr. Rotbart.
He hopes to launch clinical trials of antiviral drugs by
Schering Plough Corp., the G.D. Searle unit of Monsanto Co.
and the Sterling Winthrop unit of Kodak.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
