ID: 280	RANK: 89	SCORE: 12.418620
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870724-0049 </DOCNO>
<HL> Reagan Puts Homosexual on AIDS Panel
Against Counsel of Conservative Advisers
---
By Ellen Hume and Jeanne Saddler
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> WNEWS
PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN>
<DATELINE> ROCKVILLE, Md.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   President Reagan, overruling his own conservative advisers, appointed a doctor who is an avowed homosexual to his new presidential commission on AIDS. 

   The commission, which met for the first time here yesterday, has no prominent AIDS specialists but does include New York Archbishop John Cardinal O'Connor, several health professionals and conservative activists. 

   In a written statement, newly appointed panelist Dr. Frank Lilly said he hopes to "forcefully represent the gay community as well as the biomedical community as a member of this commission." 
Dr. Lilly is chairman of the genetics department of Albert Einstein Medical Center in New York. 

   Separately, the Labor Department said it will require that health-care employers adopt procedures protecting workers from contracting the AIDS virus, or face fines of up to $10,000. 

   The 13-member presidential commission was introduced by President Reagan yesterday after he toured a pediatric AIDS ward at the National Institutes of Health here. 
"I will not stop, will not rest until we send AIDS the way of smallpox and polio," Mr. Reagan said, after picking up one 14-month-old baby born with the fatal acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 

   The president referred to "the death of friends and former associates" from the sexually transmitted disease, which has hit hardest among homosexuals and intravenous drug users but is now spreading to the broader population, including children born to AIDS victims. 

   The Labor Department's move will force private hospitals and other concerns to adopt special precautions, such as protective gloves and gowns and the careful handling of needles and scalpel blades. 
The department's Occupational Safety and Health Administration will begin inspecting hospitals and other facilities within three to four months, officials said. 

   Health professionals on the president's commission include its chairman, Eugene Mayberry, who is chief executive officer of the Mayo Clinic; Colleen Conway-Welch, dean of nursing at Vanderbilt University; Theresa Crenshaw, director of a California sex dysfunction clinic; and Burton J. Lee III, a cancer specialist from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 

   Also serving on the panel is Indiana State Health Commissioner Woodrow A. Myers Jr., who won plaudits for calming public fears when AIDS victim Ryan White attended an Indiana public elementary school. 
Others include Project HOPE founder William B. Walsh, Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. Chief Executive John J. Creedon, and retired Chief of Naval Operations James D. Watkins. 

   The president's new commission includes several outspoken conservatives: Saturday Evening Post publisher Cory SerVaas, who also is a medical doctor; Amway Corp. founder Richard De Vos, an active Republican Party fund-raiser; and Illinois State Rep. Penny Pullen, an associate of anti-feminist leader Phyllis Schlafly, who has introduced in the Illinois legislature a controversial bill mandating the tracing of AIDS patients' sexual contacts for the past seven years. 

   Criticism of the commission appointments yesterday came from public health officials disappointed that AIDS specialists weren't included and from conservatives upset about the last-minute addition of a homosexual panelist. 
President Reagan said the selection of the commissioners relied heavily on advice from Mrs. Reagan's brother, a Philadelphia physician. 

   Saying he was "upset and disappointed" at the Lilly appointment, Sen. Gordon Humphrey issued a statement saying it would send a message to impressionable youths that homosexuality is acceptable. 
"The practice of homosexuality is immoral. 
The consequence of that immoral behavior is AIDS," the conservative New Hampshire Republican said. 

   White House domestic policy adviser Gary Bauer and others had actively opposed appointing a known homosexual to the panel but were overruled by the president, White House officials said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
