ID: 280	RANK: 90	SCORE: 12.294519
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880823-0118 </DOCNO>
<HL> Labor Letter: A Special News Report on People And Their Jobs in Offices, Fields and Factories </HL>
<AUTHOR> Selwyn Feinstein </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> BAC IBM GQ GM BNS CRX PRM DD LABOR </CO>
<IN> TOB AIR BCY </IN>
<TEXT>
   CUTBACKS CONTINUE at some corporate units, despite strong economy. 

   BankAmerica Corp. trims 5,000 staffers this year, with middle managers among the targets. 
"We have tried to have people manage larger groups," it says. 
International Business Machines Corp. also is cutting. 
It wants to push decision-making down the chain of command and reduce headquarters staff review. 
By the American Management Association's tally, one in five companies with more than 500 workers is paring employment over the next year. 

   Some companies cut back at certain locations while expanding elsewhere. 
Grumman Corp. is eliminating 2,600 jobs, mostly through attrition, at plants on New York's Long Island, where it complains of the high cost of doing business. 
But it adds as many as 1,000 workers, mostly engineers, in Florida and 1,200 in Pennsylvania, including a handful brought in from New York. 

   General Motors Corp. says it is finished with downsizing: "We're at a point where we're feeling pretty good." 

   SMOKING BANS at companies may be easier to impose than achieve. 

   The Mayo Clinic, which has been offering eight-week quit-smoking programs since 1975 in Rochester, Minn., finds that only one in five "graduates" really gives up tobacco for good. 
Nearly a third of those taking the formal training abstained from smoking the first year. 
But about 20% of these quitters ultimately resumed the habit. 

   Mayo Clinic researchers say the most likely candidates to give up smoking permanently are male white-collar workers worried about tobacco's health effects and who previously had quit for more than a month. 
Those grouped as "other" than white-collar workers are only half as likely to stop. 

   FLY CHEAP, companies insist of their traveling executives. 

   Increasing numbers of corporations are writing travel policies with ever tighter and more specific cost-saving rules, consultant Runzheimer International says. 
Employees at three of four firms now have to live with the tougher rules, it says. 
Travelers, for instance, aren't being urged simply to use the cheapest transit between airport and hotel. 
Today, says Runzheimer, they're being told to shun auto rentals for the airport bus. 

   Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturing Co., in a policy revision, makes travelers responsible for paying their own bills, not to be reimbursed until the spending is approved. 
CRS Sirrine Inc. won't pay for any personal expenses, even a phone call home. 
And no one at the company flies first class. 
Prime Computer Inc. estimates it cut its airline expenses almost $40,000 a month by insisting that travelers seek out the lowest fares. 

   Du Pont Co. figures its longstanding effort to curb travel costs saved it $25 million last year. 

   TWELVE UNIONS, in a rare cooperative venture in employee stock ownership, are teaming to take WFI Industries, a Seattle tug and shipyard company, out of bankruptcy court today and turn control over to 400 remaining workers, with a former union president installed as boss. 

   UNCLE SAM WANTS YOU. 
The Office of Personnel Management stages a job fair Friday and Saturday at the Hyatt Regency in Crystal City, Va., to hunt for health, science and technology workers for executive branch agencies nationally, including the CIA. 
"We have a difficult time recruiting," an official concedes. 
The OPM also wants to start using headhunters. 

   UNION ORGANIZING continues to slow. 
The Bureau of National Affairs, a reporting company, counts 3,545 representation elections last year, down from 3,923 in 1986 and 4,118 in 1985. 
In this year's first quarter, the tally slipped further, to 763 elections from 797 the year before. 

   ENTREPRENEURSHIP LIVES, at least on campus. 
Fully 46% of the college students surveyed by Roper Organization consider a "business of one's own" an excellent way to get ahead. 
When adults were asked a similar question last year, only 22% considered business ownership a great idea. 

   EARLY RETIREMENT could be losing appeal, an economist suggests. 

   For more than a century, fewer male workers have remained on the job after reaching what's become accepted as the normal retirement age of 65. 
Where nearly half of all men over 65 were in the labor force in 1950, only a bit more than 15% were participating by mid-1985. 
Social Security benefits and pensions lured them off the job. 
But the decline may have run its course, says Jon Moen, an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. 

   Using Labor Department statistics, Mr. Moen says the labor-force participation of older males moved up to 17% by the end of last year from a seasonally adjusted 15.2% in July 1985, in part because of the end of mandatory retirement rules and increased self-employment. 
And the increase is likely to accelerate, he says, as a scheduled delay in full Social Security benefits and higher wages for a shrinking labor pool make work more attractive. 

   The changing job mix from manufacturing to service also will make it physically easier for seniors to work. 

   THE CHECKOFF: Chief financial officers spend 58 hours a week on the job, leaving time for family but not enough for other interests, recruiter Heidrick &amp; Struggles says. . . . 
Are the Japanese telling us something? 
Nikkei Research buys rights to a market-research technique called Weighted Attitude Response, or WAR. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
