ID: 171	RANK: 26	SCORE: 8.471877
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871001-0075 </DOCNO>
<HL> What Is Swaziland?
Well, for One Thing,
It Isn't Switzerland
---
Rallying From Identity Crisis,
African Land Is Attracting
Coke and Other Businesses
---
By Roger Thurow
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/01/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AFRIC
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<DATELINE> MBABANE, Swaziland  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Derek von Wissell, as cosmopolitan a man as you will find in the bucolic kingdom of Swaziland, long suspected that his country had an identity crisis. 
But he didn't know how bad things were until he climbed into a New York City cab a couple of years ago. 

   "I'm in this taxi," he recalls, "and the driver asks me where I'm from. 
I said, 'Swaziland.' 
He says, 'Oh, I've got a cousin in Switzerland.' 
I said, 'That's nice, but I'm from Swaziland.' 
And he says, 'Yeah, like I said, I've got a cousin there.'" 

   Much the wiser after his ride, Mr. von Wissell, who is Swaziland's minister for commerce, industry and tourism, sensed that his mission to attract foreign investment to his country was doomed. 
Still, when he got back home, he sent letters to 250 U.S. companies operating in neighboring South Africa and hoped for the best. 

   "The response was limited," he remembers. 
"In fact, that's an overstatement." 
Only three -- count 'em, three -- perfunctory replies were received. 
The rest probably ended up in Switzerland. 
"The name Swaziland," Mr. von Wissell sadly concluded, "didn't mean anything to anyone." 

   But that was all before sanctions. 
Just a year ago tomorrow, the U.S. Congress passed an array of economic sanctions against South Africa, and something magical happened to this kingdom. 
People -- not all of them, mind you, but some -- started getting interested in Swaziland. 
If Mr. von Wissell sent out 250 letters today, chances are he would get at least six replies. 

   The reason for the new interest: As sanctions against South Africa picked up steam around the world and corporate disinvestment followed, several companies operating in that country looked for a new home -- or, in the case of South African companies, a second home -- in the region. 
That is when they spied Swaziland, which, much to the country's consternation, has often been mistaken for one of the apartheid homelands created by South Africa. 

   Suddenly, things began popping here. 
Coca-Cola Co. shut down its South African concentrate plant and moved in. 
Several South African manufacturers, coveting the Made in Swaziland label, opened up factories. 
Space at the industrial park near the city of Manzini became a hot item. 

   Sanctions, at long last, had put Swaziland on the map. 
Not on the maps of the world's cabbies, perhaps, but certainly on the maps of some corporate board rooms. 

   "Coca-Cola, here in Swaziland, we couldn't believe it at first," marvels Jabu Matsebula, an editor of the Times of Swaziland. 
"We knew that Coke is very secretive and selective. 
For them to pick Swaziland meant we're on our way." 

   The subjects of Swaziland have since realized that not everything goes better with Coke. 
Just a few weeks ago, Singapore refused a shipment of Swazi pine furniture because it figured the country couldn't produce anything so sophisticated. 
And an international railway convention wouldn't accept Swaziland's credentials until it proved it was a legitimate country. 
Swaziland, which gained its independence from Britain in 1968, had to produce its United Nations membership card. 

   Obscurity is hard to shake. 
Nonetheless, recognition by Coke and other companies is a start. 
At the moment, in fact, the partly government-owned Swaziland Industrial Development Co. has about all the exposure it can stand. 
Its small staff is overworked, with 15 foreign-investment projects amounting to 150 million emalangeni ($75 million) on the drawing board and several others in the discussion stage. 

   Most of these are a variety of South African manufacturing ventures. 
Others include a couple of Taiwanese and Israeli textile companies and British and West German machine-tool makers. 
In addition, Swazi officials say that American companies Eastman Kodak Co. and General Electric Co., having disinvested from South Africa, are considering establishing bases in Swaziland. 

   This activity may not seem like much to a developed country like, say, Switzerland, but it constitutes a bona fide boom in a place like Swaziland, which has only 750,000 citizens and an agriculture-based economy. 

   It is an ironic boom, though, for Swazi officials had persistently argued against sanctions, believing that no good could come of them. 
They feared that Swaziland, a black-ruled nation that is surrounded on three sides by South Africa and is inextricably linked to its economy, would inevitably get smacked by any blow aimed at its big neighbor. 
They also worried that sanctions would lead to greater repression and violence in South Africa, which could in turn upset the tranquillity here -- particularly if Pretoria stepped up cross-border raids in pursuit of its opponents. 

   Even worse would be a border blockade by the South Africans against those neighbors that advocated sanctions. 
Such a blockade against Swaziland would strangle the Swazis' external trade. 

   "We were hesitant to bring down the wrath of South Africa," says Mr. von Wissell, the only white member of the Swazi cabinet. 

   So far, none of these fears have come to pass, but sanctions have brought Swaziland some unimagined problems along with the benefits. 

   No sooner had Swaziland established a name for itself, thanks to sanctions, than it was soiled by unscrupulous "sanctions-busters" in South Africa using fake Swazi labels. 
A shipment of Swazi wine ended up in Canada, yet Swaziland has no vineyards. 
One Middle Eastern country received a load of Swazi citrus that amounted to four times Swaziland's annual citrus production. 
Electric heaters, which are almost nonexistent in this temperate kingdom, have appeared bearing Made in Swaziland labels. 
Swazi officials have lodged complaints with South African authorities, who have promised to investigate the matter. 

   Then there is the pineapple problem. 
Shut out of the U.S., South African pineapple growers have been unloading their fruit in Europe, squeezing Swaziland out of its traditional market. 
As a result, the warehouses at Swaziland Fruit Canners Ltd. are overflowing with canned pineapples. 
In some storage areas there is no longer enough room for the forklifts, bearing yet more crates, to make a turn. 

   "Two months after the sanctions, we started feeling the effect," says H. van Thiel Berghuys, the company's managing director. 
He points to some crates sitting outside in the rain, and notes that about $200,000 is being spent to build another warehouse. 
"I'm telling you, it isn't funny," he says dolefully. 

   On balance, though, the sanctions have the Swazis smiling. 
The new foreign investment has created several thousand jobs and helped the economy achieve a growth rate projected this year at 7%. 

   "We see ourselves as the next Mauritius," says Scott Reid of the Industrial Development Co., referring to the Indian Ocean island that has become an offshore industrial haven. 
"We've got a lot to offer." 

   Swaziland does have quite a bit going for it, at least in the troubled context of southern Africa. 
For starters, it is peaceful, unlike Angola and Mozambique, where civil wars are raging. 
It is fertile, unlike Botswana, which is blanketed by the Kalahari desert. 
It likes capitalism, unlike Zimbabwe and Zambia. 
What's more, it is relatively modern: Videocassette recorders are starting to catch on. 

   Swaziland has also been able to avert the bane of other black African countries: dictatorial one-party politics. 
It simply doesn't have any parties. 
The late King Sobhuza II, who reigned 61 years, effectively abolished them a decade ago when it seemed that all they ever argued about was the necessity of having a king. 

   And, most soothing to potential investors, Swaziland is the epitome of laissez-faire. 
The present king, 19-year-old Mswati III, is more likely to pop into a fast-food joint than into an industrial-policy debate, although he does cut the ribbon at a new factory now and then. 

   Coca-Cola came here for a combination of these reasons, not to mention the various tax incentives. 
"They've also got some spectacular golf courses here," says Edward Ettinger, Coke's general manager in Swaziland. 

   He reflects on the country's past identity problems and comes up with a thought that might clear things up once and for all. 
"You know," he says, "if Swaziland can maintain its neutrality in the region, it has the potential to become the Switzerland of Africa." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
