ID: 171	RANK: 41	SCORE: 7.030966
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880121-0108 </DOCNO>
<HL> The Dispossessed: Far From the Unrest, South African Blacks In Rural Areas Suffer --- A Dry 'Homeland' Town Has Little Work or Hope; Even the Gardens Are Barren --- Couples Live Apart to Survive </HL>
<AUTHOR> Roger Thurow (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AFRIC </CO>
<DATELINE> LAXEY, South Africa  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Being the health worker in this tiny village, Lizzie Nouse knows its ills well. 
"Oh, the stories I can tell you," she says, settling down to do just that on the porch of the clinic. 

   She tells of malnutrition and its deceptive effects: The children look younger than they are and the adults older. 
She matter-of-factly lists the Laxey children who have died lately; "Almost every woman here has lost at least one," she says. 

   In fact, by Mrs. Nouse's diagnosis, the community itself is barely alive. 
"There is no work for our men," she says. 
"They have either left us or they lie around drunk. 
We have no money to pay for our children's school, so they run on the streets. 
There isn't enough water, or food, or firewood. 
We feel we have been forgotten." 

   During the unrest in South Africa the international focus has been on its black urban areas, the crowded townships that are the breeding grounds of political discontent. 
But difficult as township conditions may be, those of black rural communities are far worse. 

   South Africa is dotted with hundreds of destitute villages like Laxey, a kind of geographic pox spread by a two-decade-long program of herding blacks into self-governing "tribal homelands." 
Their residents are apartheid's dispossessed -- people who have been uprooted, dumped in a place far away from home and more or less abandoned. 
For all its gold, its diamonds and its heart transplants, South Africa has pockets of deprivation worse than the general conditions in some of its much poorer black-ruled neighbors. 

   Under domestic and international pressure, the government now claims to have stopped forced removals. 
But their legacy remains. 
The yawning economic gap, between communities that are of the First World and others that are of the Third, underlies much of the social strife that has wrenched South Africa. 

   Rural areas, mainly tribal homelands, are where nearly two-thirds of South Africa's blacks live. 
Subsistence farming supports some of them, but fewer than 10%; most other households look to husbands or sons who travel long distances to work in factories or mines, rarely returning home. 
An increasing number of rural black families rely solely on handouts. 

   Much of the charity comes from Operation Hunger, a private group that collects contributions, mainly from white South Africans, and distributes corn meal and powdered soup to 1.2 million poor people. 
Operation Hunger recently studied 28 rural black communities and found evidence of malnutrition in more than half of the children examined. 
In several villages, more than 80% of people had no work. 
In some places 60% of households were headed by women. 

   To Ina Perlman, Operation Hunger's executive director, the numbers are "a disgrace to a country with our gross national product." 
In 1986, South Africa's GNP was $2,040 per capita. 
Yet whites had per-capita disposable income of more than twice that. 

   The South African government long neglected the rural poor; those in the relocated villages, after all, had officially become the responsibility of the homeland governments. 
And the homeland governments have been less interested in helping them than in acquiring the trappings of quasi-statehood -- parliament buildings, stadiums, hotels and casinos. 
Pretoria also points out that much of the misery is due to years of persistent drought that is only now easing. 

   More recently, South Africa has begun to promote rural development. 
"We are very sincere in trying to bring a balance in socio-economic conditions," says Koos Engelbrecht, an official of the Department of National Health and Population Development. 
But he cautions that "it is going to take a big effort, a lot of money, and, let's face it, a lot of time." 

   In Laxey, time is one thing people have in abundance. 
"I haven't worked for years," says Jim Matloug, an elderly man with a scrubby white beard who stops by the clinic just to talk. 
He squeezes the last drop out of a milk carton and drops it on the ground. 
"I'm useless now." 

   "The only thing he waits for," says Mrs. Nouse, "is a coffin." 

   Mr. Matloug isn't waiting alone, for Laxey is a place of old men and women, along with mothers and their children. 
Most men of working age have left in search of jobs. 
Some of them never come back. 

   In their old home, in a place called Ga-Thlose about 40 miles south of the town of Kuruman, jobs could be found. 
The women could work as domestic servants for white families, and many of the men worked in asbestos and manganese mines or for farmers. 
Thus, families could stay together. 
In addition, the land was more fertile and big towns were accessible over adequate roads. 

   But in 1977, government trucks arrived and carried the 40,000 blacks of Ga-Thlose to the southern edge of the Kalahari Desert, about 50 miles to the other side of Kuruman. 
Here, in the remote reaches of what had been declared the tribal homeland of Bophuthatswana, jobs are as scarce as rain, and the only commerce consists of a couple of small, overpriced general stores. 

   Raising crops on the parched banks of the Mashewing River here has proved nearly impossible. 
Kuruman now is reachable only by rutted gravel roads. 
To travel there and back by bus may cost as much as 16 rand, or about $8, which isn't easy for a Bophuthatswanan to pay. 

   Just ask Piet Molopi of nearby Padstow, who retired to a South African pension equal to about $50 a month after 38 years as a mineworker. 
Now 73, he has to go to Kuruman to pick up the pension each month. 
After paying for the bus ride, he is already down to about $42. 
The rest goes to pay off a credit note from his food purchases the previous month. 
Then he must run up another tab to buy this month's supply of corn meal, sugar and coffee. 

   The pension money doesn't last even a day, and the food barely lasts two weeks. 
"Then I suffer," Mr. Molopi says. 

   As it happens, the whites of Kuruman have also suffered, though to a far lesser degree. 
The town's population has declined by several hundred to about 4,000 since the relocation of blacks. 
Its merchants have lost not only black customers but also some whites; many whites now cross into the nearest part of Bophuthatswana for grocery shopping because the sales tax is lower. 

   Donald Riekert, a photographer and poet who has lived in the area all his life, says several Kuruman retailers have closed, and in trying to attract investment, Kuruman and Bophuthatswana villages find themselves arguing against each other. 
"The problem is that what should be one economic unit has been divided into two political units," he says. 
"The result is that we're both struggling to survive." 

   This is about the only similarity, though. 
While the whites of Kuruman come home from work and turn on their lawn sprinklers, the people along the dry Mashewing River desperately try to grow something, anything, in the ubiquitous red sand. 
"The wind always blows, and the sand covers everything," says Cecelia Mongaka, as she looks at the dune covering the pitiful garden in front of Padstow's Catholic Church. 

   Windmills and several diesel pumps bring water to taps on the dusty streets, but it is never enough. 
When the diesel fuel runs out, as it seems to do at the end of every month, the pumps stand idle for several days until a new shipment arrives. 
But the plants and livestock can't wait. 

   "I'm down to one cow and one calf, two donkeys and six goats," says Mr. Matloug of Laxey. 
"I came here with a lot more, but they have died from the dryness. 
I've also had to sell some, to feed my family." 

   Anyone with even one goat is considered rich along the Mashewing. 
The Operation Hunger study found that in Padstow only 9% of the adults have work. 
Households are large, averaging eight people, but their monthly income averages only about $40. 
For nearly three-quarters of Padstow families, the only means of survival is the fortnightly rations of corn meal and soup the relief organization distributes. 
"We've dug many graves of hunger here," sighs Mrs. Mongaka. 

   All this leaves the people vulnerable to exploitation. 
Some women say they have done government road-repair work for as little as $15 a month. 
White farmers frequently come through the area looking for cheap labor. 

   Kierie Strydom pulls his oversize truck to a stop across from the clinic in Laxey. 
He hires about 250 residents for nine or 10 months of the year and has come today to get some more for a busy period. 
He pays $1.50 to $2.50 a day for picking peanuts and culling kernels of seed corn. 
During the corn harvest, much of which is done by hand, he says he pays maybe six or seven bags of corn for every 100 filled. 

   "I give them their meals, and I also give them coffee and sugar. 
I treat them right," he says, before driving off with a couple of dozen boys. 

   Up the road are three young women who worked on a farm most of last year. 
Among them they have 10 children but no husbands living at home. 
They were hoping to bring back plenty of corn meal for their children, but after 10 months of work, they say, they returned with a total of just five bags. 

   "They say they don't ever want to do that again," says Mrs. Nouse, the health worker. 
But, she notes, in Laxey one doesn't have many choices. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
