ID: 171	RANK: 7	SCORE: 12.464444
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880218-0006 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: TV: Oriental Intrigue, African Fauna, American Music </HL>
<AUTHOR> Martha Bayles </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Saturday, Feb. 20, 8-10 p.m. EST, on HBO (repeated Feb. 24 and 29, and March 3, 6 and 8): "Baja Oklahoma." 
In Fort Worth, Texas, an attractive, 40ish barmaid (Lesley Ann Warren) encounters an old flame (Peter Coyote), who expresses his regret for having dumped her 20 years ago and offers to help revive her faded dream of becoming a country-music songwriter. 
Can she trust him? 
The plot, taken from the novel by Dan Jenkins, sounds like typical TV-movie fare. 
But the writing, script, country music and local color (never mind local off-color) are outstanding. 

   Sunday-Wednesday, Feb. 21-24, 9-11 p.m. EST, on NBC: "James Clavell's Noble House." 
Here are just a few of the stars promised to twinkle in this high-gloss miniseries set in modern Hong Kong: Denholm Elliott, Pierce Brosnan, Deborah Raffin, Ben Masters, John Rhys-Davies, Khigh Dhiegh, Gordon Jackson and Nancy Kwan. 

   Sundays, Feb. 21-March 6, 8-9 p.m. EST, on PBS (PBS air dates and times vary, so check local listings): "Okavango: Jewel of the Kalahari." 
Just south of Victoria Falls, in the Kalahari Desert in northern Botswana, the Okavango River forms an extraordinary inland delta. 
This three-part "Nature" miniseries presents the history of the area and its amazingly rich flora and fauna, including bat-eared foxes, dancing ostriches, shrimp-eating flamingos and leaping bush babies. 

   Tuesdays, Feb. 23 and March 1, 8-9 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Battles in the War on Cancer." 
Remember Interleukin-2, the miracle cancer drug that made headlines back in 1985? 
The first part of this special edition of "NOVA" examines the mounting costs of testing this (or any) new drug, while the second part brings more heartening news about better detection and treatment of breast cancers. 

   Wednesday, Feb. 24, 8:30-9 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Not Your Average Russian: The Pozner File." 
Having grown up in the U.S., Vladimir Pozner has spoken to us in fluent media-babble on many occasions calling for "expert" Soviet commentary. 
Until recently, he did so as an official spokesman for Gosteleradio, so it's puzzling to see a PBS press release call him "the unofficial voice of the Soviet Union in the West." 
Perhaps by scrutinizing this documentary, we can figure out whose "Pozner file" the film makers used. 

   Wednesday, Feb. 24, 9-10:30 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Billy Galvin." 
Like the HBO film mentioned above, this tale of Irish blue-collar Boston has a predictable TV-movie plot: generational conflict between an independent son (Lenny Van Dohlen) and his strong-willed father (Karl Malden). 
But also like the HBO film, this "American Playhouse" presentation offers a rich sense of place. 
The language is wonderful, and the actors even rise to the challenge of approximating the Boston accent! 

   Friday, Feb. 26, 9-10:30 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Wolf Trap Salutes Dizzy Gillespie." 
Oscar Peterson, Carmen McRae, Benny Carter and other jazz greats gathered last June to pay tribute, on his 70th birthday, to the man with the rubber cheeks and the tip-tilted horn. 
The show also includes excellent film clips of past performances with the likes of John Coltrane and Charlie Parker. 

   Saturday, Feb. 27, 10 p.m.-midnight EST, on PBS: "Firing Line Special Edition: The Next First Lady." 
No, the hosts of this interview program -- William F. Buckley Jr. and Robert Strauss -- do not know who the next First Lady will be. 
But they will be talking with all the possibilities, except Jacqueline Jackson and Barbara Bush. 

   Sunday-Monday, Feb. 28-29, 9-11 p.m. EST, on CBS: "Bluegrass." 
That graceful filly Cheryl Ladd plays a would-be member of the high-stepping Kentucky horsebreeding set, only to be thwarted by a colicky, bad-tempered stud played by Wayne Rogers. 
But she's got the right bloodlines and the best training, and soon leaves her dainty hoof prints in all the right places. 

   Monday, Feb. 29, 8-9 p.m. EST, on CBS: "Superman's 50th Anniversary: A Celebration of the Man of Steel." 
Muhammad Ali, Hal Holbrook, Jimmy Breslin, Lee Salk and many others will sing the praises of this icon of American popular culture, in an extravaganza produced by "Saturday Night Live" creator Lorne Michaels. 

   Monday, Feb. 29, 9-11 p.m. EST, on ABC: "Perfect People." 
In order to star in this confection about "two middle-aged couch potatoes" who strive for physical beauty by embarking on an incredible ordeal of diet, exercise, plastic surgery, hair transplants and liposuction, actors Lauren Hutton and Perry King had to embark on an incredible ordeal of skullcaps, hairpieces, false jowls, makeup and body-altering prosthetics. 

   Tuesday, March 1, 9-11 p.m. EST, on CBS: "The 37th Annual Miss USA Pageant." 
Speaking of perfection and incredible ordeals, don't miss these 51 fine young things strutting their stuff in old El Paso. 

   Wednesday, March 2, 8-11 p.m. EST, on CBS: "The 30th Annual Grammy Awards." 
If you get argumentative about the success of Steve Winwood's comeback, or about whether Los Lobos is more authentic than Suzanne Vega, watch this prestigious music awards show. 
If you never heard of these people, tune in and find out who they are, and what's been happening this year in pop (and a little bit about jazz and classical) music. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
