ID: 132	RANK: 5	SCORE: 16.596865
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881117-0017 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Film: Unsettling Picture Puts Society on Trial </HL>
<AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   For her latest movie, "A Cry in the Dark," Meryl Streep's head has been helmeted into a dark Buster Brown hairdo. 
This blunt cut gives her the wary look of a punt returner facing the unfriendly heavyweights waiting to tackle. 

   At first it's off-putting; you think, there she goes again, acting with her hair. 
But as this unsettling picture progresses, you realize that the look is deliberately off-putting. 
You are supposed to see Ms. Streep's character, Lindy Chamberlain, as the world saw her -- cold and remote, peering out from that protective headgear. 
And even more effectively than usual, Ms. Streep disappears into that cool character speaking with an impeccably rough-hewn Down Under accent. 

   The real Lindy Chamberlain became a tabloid queen in 1980, when she took a vacation in the Australian outback with her husband, a minister, and their three children. 
One evening as the family prepared its campsite, their youngest child, a nine-week-old girl, disappeared. 
Though no one saw who took her, the family believed it was a dingo, the bushy-tailed Australian cousin of the American coyote. 
The story was played as a tragedy for a while. 
But the Chamberlains, who didn't have media advisers, watched their lives spin out of control. 
They became the objects of rumors and suspicions that Lindy had murdered their daughter and that her husband, Michael, had covered up for her. 

   The case became an Australian "cause celebre." 
Public opinion moved against the Chamberlains because they were Seventh-Day Adventists and because they seemed to enjoy the publicity they were getting -- and later because Lindy, with her stoniness and snarls, wasn't publicity-conscious enough. 
Despite the scant evidence and absence of motive, she was convicted of murder, at which point the journalistic community began to feel some sympathy for her. 
In 1985, John Bryson wrote about the case in "Evil Angels," the book that became the foundation for the movie. 

   "Cry in the Dark" has a distracted quality, as though director Fred Schepisi, who was born and raised in Australia, wants to keep his characters at a distance, the way they might seem on the evening news. 
He doesn't bow to the conventions of dramatic build, and for the most part gives little sense of time passing or what his characters are thinking or feeling. 
Yet the picture's power draws from this deliberate distancing; the movie isn't about Lindy Chamberlain so much as it is about the way the facts become obscured by imagery and by rumor, which feed a collective mythology. 

   Mr. Schepisi's strategy -- he co-authored the script with Robert Caswell -- is to quickly dispense with the question of Lindy's innocence. 
The opening sequence makes the film maker's position clear. 
Lindy may have made a mistake by failing to zip her baby into the tent, but she didn't -- as was later suggested -- cut the baby's head off and then, coolly, join her family for a campfire cookout. 
The film matter-of-factly lays out the horrible nighttime hunt for the child and the cruel, mundane details of the day after; for example, the district nurse supplies Lindy, who was still nursing the baby, with a breast pump and a diuretic to dry up her milk. 

   Thus, as the rest of the film unfolds, the audience is made to feel the way Michael Dukakis's closest friends must have felt as they watched their man keep repeating his mistakes on camera as though he'd never taken a look at himself on videotape. 
The audience is put in the position of believing in Lindy, and watching her do everything exactly wrong, from a P.R. perspective. 
Her sound bites on the evening news show a woman wearing a mask. 
"You could crack walnuts on her face," someone mutters. (She does look a little witchy when a detractor spits at her in a phone booth and she starts laughing. 
It's probably a neurotic reaction but it looks bad. 
She even looks out-of-place in her own family: Her husband and kids are towheads while her mop is dark.) 
The film observes that people don't like to watch a mother speak about her murdered child dispassionately, though such behavior might be called stoicism in a man. 

   Mr. Schepisi's body of work keeps returning to his fascination with myth and with the chaos that inevitably follows when civilization intrudes on nature. 
In "The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith," he told the story of an aborigine half-caste who vents his frustration by murdering whites; "Iceman" was about a primitive exploited by scientists. 
The director has brought a supernatural sensibility to the Western genre ("Barbarosa") and to romantic comedy ("Roxanne"). 

   Here, he and his longtime collaborator, cinematographer Ian Baker, have visually split the film. 
The sequences shot in the outback are resonant and sweeping, full of portent. 
The film makers return again and again to Ayer's Rock, the sacred aboriginal site that has become Australia's biggest tourist attraction. 
It was at this strange place -- the mountainous "rock" looks like a huge clump of red dirt that somebody tossed in the desert among the scrub brush -- that the Chamberlain's baby, Azaria, disappeared. 
The camera zooms in on Ayer's Rock with such speed it seems as though the rock is exerting a centripetal force. 
It's as though the film makers are saying: "Maybe we shouldn't tramp all over nature's preserve. 
Bad things will happen." 

   When the action turns to the humans, the colors wash out and the action slows down. 
The civilized world seems faded and remote -- as though the whole thing were being watched on TV monitors with bad reception. 

   Throughout the picture, Mr. Schepisi has set up a rotating chorus of kibitzers. 
He lays out the distortions and wild rumors by planting clumps of people in bars, at restaurants, at dockside, all of them talking about the Chamberlain case. 
The methodology is a little clunky; it's actually quite rare to see rooms of reporters sit goggle-eyed in front of TV sets and trade judgment calls, the way they do over and over again in this movie. 

   Still, it's a way to efficiently convey information to the audience. 
So we learn that people thought that Azaria, the child's name, meant "sacrifice in the wilderness" and believed that Seventh-Day Adventists were some weird cult that periodically killed babies. 
The gossip also reveals a strange nationalistic support of dingoes, as though the very act of accusing the indigenous wild dog of murder proved the Chamberlains were outcasts (women showed up at Lindy's trial wearing T-shirts with the slogan, "The Dingo Is Innocent"). 

   The picture has the sensibility of a strong piece of journalism. 
You never quite get inside the characters; it's not they who are fascinating but the situation they're in. 
Yet there are glimpses into the Chamberlains at home that are powerfully telling. 
Lindy becomes pregnant again after Azaria's death; she gets bigger and bigger as her trial approaches, and more tetchy. 
Her husband -- played sensitively by the Irish-born New Zealander Sam Neill -- finds himself overwhelmed by what's happened to them. 
He's a minister forced to question his faith in the most fundamental way. 
He's full of emotion; he picks at his head until it bleeds during the trial. 
Lindy, meanwhile, seems to be receding into her own flesh, occasionally emerging with a flash of anger. 

   This is a tough character to get hold of -- but Ms. Streep manages to do it. 
Though the accents, and certainly the coifs, ought to be old hat by now, this is a startling performance: You never see where it starts and where it ends. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
