ID: 132	RANK: 50	SCORE: 10.372548
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870305-0056 </DOCNO>
<HL> Media and Advertising Firms Join Forces
To Launch Major Anti-Drug Campaign
---
By Joanne Lipman
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EK WPOB DJ CCB
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)
PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<TEXT>
   "My brother's friend Rick wanted to do something special for him for his birthday. 
He bought him some crack. . . . 
That was two years ago today," says the clean-cut teenager. 
"Maybe Rick was the lucky one. 
He died." 

   The teen leans forward, and the camera reveals a comatose young man staring blankly from a bed. 
"Happy birthday, buddy," the teen says, patting his brother. 

   America may soon be deluged by commercial messages like this. 
Starting today, in what is being billed as the biggest public-service campaign since World War II, an advertising and media partnership is launching a war against illegal drugs. 
It has asked the nation's print and broadcast media to support the three-year effort by donating a staggering $500 million of ad space and time each year -- millions more than even Coca-Cola Co. or Chrysler Corp. spends annually on advertising. 

   The goal is to "convince people that drug usage is not chic, not acceptable, and is plain stupid," says Louis T. Hagopian, chairman of the New York-based ad agency N.W. Ayer and former chairman of the American Association of Advertising Agencies. 
It is this trade group that last spring created the coalition, known as the Media-Advertising Partnership for a Drug-Free America. 

   Support for the campaign "has been very positive" overall, with most major media -- including Newsweek magazine, ABC-TV and The Wall Street Journal -- agreeing to participate, according to Richard T. O'Reilly, the partnership's director. 
Yet few seem willing, or in some cases able, to donate as much space or time as the partnership has asked for. 

   Most of the resistance seems to stem from the size of the request. 
The partnership is asking that the $1.5 billion total in free advertising be in addition to existing public-service spots. 
Besides plans for other outlets, it is asking that TV stations run two spots during prime time every day for the campaign's duration; that magazines publish a full-page ad every other issue; and that newspapers donate space each week. 

   The request "isn't realistic" financially, says John DeHoll, director of advertising services for Woman's Day magazine. 
"When space does come available, it's usually because a paid ad has fallen through. 
You certainly don't plan ahead for public-service advertising like this." 

   George Schweitzer, vice president of communications for CBS Inc., adds that while his company plans to cooperate, "a specific dollar or air-time commitment . . . would be unfair to other public-service issues, such as AIDS prevention." 

   Certainly, plenty of anti-drug advertising already exists. 
The Advertising Council, a nonprofit group responsible for the majority of national public-service ads, says some $45 million of anti-drug advertising time and space was donated to it by the media in 1986 -- most of which was used for the council's "Cocaine. 
The big lie" and "Just Say 'No' to Drugs" campaigns. 
A council official estimates that total anti-drug advertising amounted to three times that much. 

   But officials in the new partnership say all that and more is needed to combat a business worth $110 billion a year -- the estimated amount Americans spend on illegal drugs. 
Although Mr.oO'Reilly concedes that "it would be unfair and unrealistic to say we're going to get everything we asked for," he expects media participation to increase after the campaign begins. 

   Mr. O'Reilly is also encouraged by the other kinds of support he's received. 
At least 200 advertising agencies have voluntarily created ads or solicited ad time and space. 
More than a dozen TV spots -- recorded on film supplied free by Eastman Kodak Co. and using actors who waived their fees -- have been shot by well-known commercial directors who donated their time. 
And a research firm has volunteered to track changes in attitudes toward drugs over the course of the campaign. 

   The ads are geared to a variety of audiences, and nearly all are intended to be powerful, even shocking. 
"I'm trying to scare you so bad that when the first kid at the locker next to you hits you with a joint or cocaine, you don't do it," says Cliff Einstein, president and creative director of Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles. 

   Dailey's anti-cocaine commercial shows a young businessman pulling an enormous white pistol from his desk drawer. 
He spins the chamber and, in excruciatingly slow motion, puts it to his head and pulls the trigger. 
If you have "Miami Vice" glamorizing drugs, says Mr. Einstein, "how are you going to come back unless you're as strong on your side of the fence as they are on theirs? 
In this case, fear and terror are a legitimate deterrent." 

   Ayer, which created three TV spots for the campaign, researched attitudes and quizzed focus groups, just as it would before creating a product campaign. 
"In talking to high-school students, we learned that the key thing for them is being in control of their lives," notes Joy Williams-Jones, the Ayer vice president who led the research. 
"They're trying to be adults. 
They can't wait to get out of the house." 

   Thus, one Ayer commercial shows a man in his 20s sitting in a living room and smoking a joint. 
He's been using marijuana for 15 years, he says, and nothing has ever happened to him: "I didn't start stealing, mugging people. 
In fact, I'd say I'm exactly the same as I was when I smoked my first joint." 
Just then, we hear his mother nagging him, and we realize he's still stuck at home. 
"Marijuana," the announcer booms, "can make nothing happen to you, too." 

   Keye/Donna/Pearlstein, the Los Angeles ad agency that created the comatose-brother spot, also used teen focus groups. 
The sessions showed that "kids may not have a fear of drugs, but they have a fear of adulterated drugs," says Paul F. Keye, the agency's chairman and creative director. 
"Also, adolescents typically have absolutely no sense of mortality -- but they can envision being vegetables." 

   Despite the agencies' best creative efforts and research, some drug-abuse professionals question the ads' format. 
They say the ads should list groups to call for help, or at least leave space for local groups to provide names themselves. 
And some criticize the partnership for not joining forces with others fighting drugs. 

   "I did go and see them, because I wanted to have some input," says Carolyn Burns, assistant director of the National Federation of Parents for Drug-Free Youth, a Washington-based nonprofit group. 
"They never got got back to me. 
I'd still be interested in working with them." 

   Mr. O'Reilly explains that leaving space for messages from local groups isn't practical for cost reasons. 
And he claims that most of the upset groups are simply trying to increase their own exposure by adding their names to the partnership's ads. 
"People are so concerned about their turf issues that they're less concerned about what has to be done," he says. 

   Partnership members say the trouble will be worth it if the program works. 
"It will take some years . . . (but) we've got to stay with it and stay with it," says Phillip Joanou, Dailey's chairman and chief executive, who first suggested the campaign. 
Advertising, he adds, is supposed to be "a powerful propaganda tool. 
So if it is, use it to do some good." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
