ID: 132	RANK: 83	SCORE: 9.254178
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890818-0073 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890818 </DD>
<AN> 890818-0073. </AN>
<HL> Advertising:
@  Movie Audiences Panning
@  Shopworn TV Commercials
@  ----
@  By Joanne Lipman </HL>
<DD> 08/18/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<CO> AXP CCI FCB AIT DE SAA WNEWS J.BDT </CO>
<IN> RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN>
<TEXT>
   At a recent Manhattan showing of "When Harry Met Sally," an otherwise polite audience of upscale young professionals turned into a vicious, near-riotous crowd when a commercial -- one that the audience had seen too many times on TV -- preceded the feature. 

   The chorus of boos and hisses drowned out the ad, but couldn't mask the insults and curses other audience members hurled at American Express Co., the advertiser. 
An American Express spokeswoman says the company is "certainly aware of the reaction," and that it is "looking at other creative executions." 
But she staunchly defends advertising on movie screens: "There is a very impressive and growing body of evidence that it can work effectively in the U.S." 

   Reaction to the American Express ad has been extreme -- both because it has long appeared on television, and because Cineplex Odeon, the 1,292-screen theater chain now running the ad, recently hiked movie prices at some Manhattan theaters to $7.50 a pop. 
But the commercial and others like it are raising anew the debate over whether Americans will ever be ready for ads with their movies. 

   European theaters have long shown commercials before feature films -- often wacky, creative commercials that audiences actually like to watch. 
But in the U.S., the commercials are too often warmed-over imitations of regular TV ads, and can be grating on the nerves of a nation already bombarded by advertising at every turn. 
"What's in it for us?" demanded one irate New Yorker in a letter recently to the theater section of the New York Times. 
Among other indignities, he went on to answer himself, "Seeing the same ads, over and over, without the benefit of remote control." 

   Perhaps if the entire moviegoing public organized against theater ads, some advertisers might reconsider. 
But that isn't likely, and advertisers aren't about to let scattered disgruntlement get in the way of a good thing; the thought of millions of captive viewers is simply too appealing. 

   Screenvision Cinema Network, the largest firm distributing commercials to theaters, delivers ads to 5,700 of the nation's 17,500 first-run theater screens. 
It boasts that more than 31 million moviegoers will see its ads over any 28-day period. 

   Terry Laughren, Screenvision's president, contends that theater audiences are perfectly happy to watch ads as long as the commercials are entertaining -- and new. 
The problem with the American Express ad, in his opinion, is that "it's a TV commercial, and it's worn out. 
Everybody has seen it." 
He says Screenvision generally requires ads to be made for the movies, not for TV. Current advertisers include the U.S. Marines and ABC-TV, which is airing "coming attractions" of two fall shows. 

   Certified Marketing Services, a Kinderhook, N.Y., research firm that has been tracking audience reactions for Screenvision since 1980, says that only about 4% of audiences react negatively to movie commercials. 
The most negative reaction, says William Smith, president, came several years ago in response to a cigarette ad, which was later withdrawn. 
The best reactions have been to two recent spots: a Dr Pepper commercial shown in May, to which 30% of audiences reacted "very favorably," and a new California Raisins commercial in which a claymation raisin stars as Michael Jackson, which drew a 24% "very favorable" response, he says. 

   But Certified Marketing's research doesn't involve audience interviews. 
The company simply hires monitors to go to theaters to watch crowd reaction. 
So, while Screenvision claims that 96% of audiences react favorably to screen commercials, its definition of "favorable" basically means absence of hoots and hisses. 

   Some Madison Avenue executives, meanwhile, suggest that the angry audiences may be confined largely to big cities. 
"I think it's a New York phenomenon. 
In most places, people don't mind theater advertising because in most places, the prices aren't as high as in New York," says Arnold Semsky, an executive vice president at Omnicom's BBDO unit. 

   In any case, even if audiences aren't enthralled with commercials in theaters, ad industry executives say, they'll get used to them soon enough. 
"We don't know of anywhere where commercials were applauded at first. 
In time, these will be accepted, too, but they've got to be done right," says John Sisk, a senior vice president of WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson Co. unit. 
Thompson clients Eastman Kodak as well as the U.S. Marines use cinema advertising. 
Other advertisers that have advertised in movie theaters include Chrysler, Oldsmobile, Champion sportswear and M&amp;M/Mars. 

   While cinema advertising is growing, the price of entry is high. 
Commercials filmed specifically for movie theaters nearly always cost more -- sometimes much more -- than their TV counterparts. 
On top of that, Screenvision charges about $650,000 for an ad to be shown nationwide, which works out to about $20 per thousand viewers for a 60-second commercial, Mr. Laughren says. 
Prime-time network television ads costs about $9.50 to $10 to reach one thousand 18-to-49 year-olds. 

   Still, advertisers are clearly intrigued. 
American Express, which only began showing ads in movie theaters about three weeks ago, is testing several commercials created specifically for movie theaters, the company's spokeswoman says. 
And, ever in search of new marketing opportunities, it is working on some theater-related services for cardholders. 

   The American Express card recently began being accepted at Cineplex Odeon theaters, for example, the better to pay those $7-plus ticket prices with. 
The company is also test-marketing other services, such as one permitting tickets to be ordered by phone. 
And as for the howls that greeted its TV commercial, "Our research doesn't show that was an across-the-board phenomenon by any means," the spokeswoman says. 
She adds, "We're still very positive that this whole concept can work effectively for us." 

   ---

   Citicorp Reviews Account 

   Citicorp is reviewing its Citicorp Savings Illinois account at N W Ayer, and will most likely award that account and a new assignment to Foote Cone &amp; Belding, industry executives said. 

   People close to Citicorp said yesterday that the new assignment will be for its national branch banking franchise. 
Included is advertising for 10 states. 
Billings couldn't be learned for either account. 
Representatives of both agencies said they hadn't been informed of such moves. 

   "We intend to maintain both Ayer and Foote Cone to serve our advertising needs," a Citicorp spokesman said. 
Ayer will continue to handle Citicorp's banking advertising in New York and also its national corporate image work. 
Foote Cone, based in Chicago, services Citicorp advertising in more than 10 countries. 

   Besides difficulty with the Citicorp business, Ayer's Chicago office is currently participating in reviews for two longtime clients. 
Illinois Bell, an Ayer client for 52 years, put its estimated $15 million account up for review in late June. 
Deere &amp; Co. is reviewing its $10 million account. 

   ---

   Ad Notes. . . . 


   NEW ACCOUNTS: Bridgestone Inc., Nashville, Tenn., awarded its estimated $10 million account to Keye/Donna/Pearlstein, New York. 
The account had previously been handled by Lintas: Campbell Ewald, Warren, Mich. . . . 
Great Wings Inc., Louisville, Ky., named OMON, New York, agency of record for its $2 million Buffalo Bucket Chicken Wings account. 

   WHO'S NEWS: Geoffrey Frost, 39, was named senior executive vice president and deputy director, marketing and planning department at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York. 
FCB/LKP is a unit of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications. . . . 
Frank Assumma, 36, and J. Edmund Keating, 41, were named executive vice presidents at Backer Spielvogel Bates, a unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
