ID: 132	RANK: 99	SCORE: 8.783089
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880503-0116 </DOCNO>
<HL> Ad-Agency Search by GM's Saturn Unit Has Been an Offbeat Corporate Courtship </HL>
<AUTHOR> Laurie P. Cohen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> GM </CO>
<IN> AUT MKT </IN>
<TEXT>
   Most companies pick their advertising agencies on the basis of cost and sample campaigns. 
Saturn Corp.'s search has seemed more like a corporate version of "The Dating Game." 

   Saturn, the General Motors Corp. subsidiary charged with reinventing American automobile manufacturing, is now winding up one of the biggest, longest and most ballyhooed ad-agency searches ever. 
The winning firm, which will probably be announced this month, will get an account expected to bill $100 million a year, with perhaps $10 million to $15 million of that going into the agency's pocket (the numbers certainly explain some of the fuss). 

   The winner will also have endured one of the more curious mating rituals in the ad business. 
Saturn's mandate is to be different, and this search, now in its eighth month, has at least sounded different. 

   The candidates -- Saturn calls them prospective "communications partners" -- never proposed any ads. 
Instead, they were judged on strategic thinking, enthusiasm and compatibility with Saturn. 
GM officials gauged "personal chemistry" over elegant dinners at which shop talk was discouraged. 
The eight-person selection committee includes not only advertising and marketing executives but also a GM dealer and a union representative. 
Moreover, the auto maker has been uncharacteristically talkative about its efforts; today, in fact, Saturn executives plan to meet with reporters to discuss the search. 

   All this has elicited more than a few chuckles in the ad world, especially among those who doubt the need for such intimacy. 
"I think it's terribly important that we feel comfortable with our ad agency," says Jack Collins, executive vice president of marketing for Hyundai Motor America, recalling his company's three-month search in 1985. 
"But I wasn't marrying them or sleeping with them, and it didn't mean I wanted to have dinner with them." 

   The man spearheading the Saturn search is Thomas Shaver, the company's director of marketing services. 
Sporting a Saturn lapel pin, he sits back in his modest cubicle at Saturn headquarters in Troy, Mich., and explains his plan. 

   "We're not being different for different's sake," Mr. Shaver says. 
"We want an agency that will fit with Saturn's culture and philosophy. 
We want to do things right. . . . 
We want to find the Big Idea." 

   The hunt for that Big Idea began last October, when Saturn started meeting with prospects. 
In the preceding months, Mr. Shaver had received letters from more than 50 agencies of all sizes asking to be considered for the account. 
He met first with such large GM incumbent agencies as D'Arcy, Masius, Benton &amp; Bowles Inc., Leo Burnett Co. and McCann-Erickson Worldwide, a subsidiary of Interpublic Group of Cos. 
These were asked how they might conduct a search like Saturn's, and from the discussions Mr. Shaver culled ideas and developed Saturn's strategy. 

   By late October, Saturn had narrowed the field to 15 candidates. 
Each had annual billings of at least $100 million. 
All of GM's incumbent agencies made the list. 
And while some that made the cut did business with other auto makers, all indicated a willingness to jettison those accounts. 

   In a typical agency search, candidates are asked to develop hypothetical campaigns for the product. 
But the Saturn suitors couldn't, because they don't know exactly what the product will be. 
Indeed, nobody outside GM knows what Saturn cars will look like when they come off the production line in 1990. 

   That secrecy may partly explain why the search has been long on touchy-feely talk and short on hard details. 
Unable to discuss the product, Saturn and the agencies have had lots of time to probe one another's psyches. 
The venues for many of these sessions were dinners where "we could break the ice, let our hair down and get to know each other," says Mr. Shaver. 

   In February, eight semifinalists were chosen. 
One of them --Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein -- had to drop out because a sister agency handles Ford Motor Co. advertising. 
The ensuing disappointment helped lead to the recent acrimonious split between top Lord Geller officials and the firm's British parent, WPP Group PLC. 

   The remaining seven were asked to prepare assessments of current ad campaigns used by three other auto makers. 
Two of the campaigns were for Hyundai and Nissan Motor Corp. cars; the third was left up to the agencies. 
All but one chose American Honda Motor Co.'s Acura. 

   Whether Saturn found the evaluations useful isn't clear. 
By some accounts, the agencies were reluctant to criticize competitors' work. 
Everyone was quick to praise Hyundai's humorous ads, but all were politic about Nissan's "Built for the Human Race" campaign, which has been widely ridiculed on Madison Avenue. 

   "I don't think anyone liked the Nissan campaign, but they went out of their way not to knock it," says Eli Bloom, the New York GM dealer who sits on the selection committee. (Mr. 
Bloom's inclusion, like that of United Automobile Workers representative Joe Malotke, reflects Saturn's companywide emphasis on Japanese-style consensus decision making.) 

   To quantify the selection process, Saturn officials used a nine-page score card to rate certain aspects of the agencies on a scale of zero to 10. 
Among the items: "This agency really would like to be Saturn's advertising partner"; "This agency has the kind of people that could work well and productively with Saturn -- both by temperament and professional competence." 

   The total scores were calculated by computer, and three finalists were selected in late March: Hal Riney &amp; Partners, of San Francisco; New York-based N.W. Ayer Inc., a GM incumbent; and Boston's Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmoupulos Inc. Mr. Shaver says that telling the others they didn't make it was "like calling your girlfriend to say you just broke up." 

   If any of the finalists see the search as overly long and chatty, they aren't saying so publicly. 
"It's both an enormous challenge and an enormous opportunity," says Jerry Siano, Ayer's vice chairman. 
Adds Jack Connors, president of Hill, Holiday, "This isn't a fight for a GM account; this is a fight for American industry." 

   Privately, however, some agency people are more cynical. 
This supposedly revolutionary approach to choosing an agency has been "lots of talk, not much substance," says an executive at one agency still in the running. 

   William Tragos, chairman of TBWA Advertising Inc., which Saturn spurned earlier this year, wasn't impressed by the search, either. 
"What's so brilliant about it?" he asks. 
"I didn't think the search was any different from what any good, well-organized client does. 
What was different was that GM was doing it." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
