ID: 270	RANK: 42	SCORE: 23.043232
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870210-0053 </DOCNO>
<HL> Asian Wall Street Journal Is Banned
By Singapore for Refusal to Print Letter</HL>
<DD> 02/10/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DJ FREST
PUBLISHING (PUB)
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Singapore effectively has banned The Asian Wall Street Journal indefinitely because it refused to publish a letter from a government official. 

   The government notified the Asian Journal that it is restricting the newspaper's circulation in Singapore to 400 copies per issue, starting next Monday. 
The Hong Kong-based regional business newspaper currently sells about 5,000 copies in Singapore. 

   The government said the minister for communications and information had declared the Asian Journal "to be a newspaper engaging in the domestic politics of Singapore." 
The action was necessary, the statement said, because the Asian Journal "has persistently refused to publish a Singapore government reply" to an article in the paper on a proposed unlisted securities market. 

   In Hong Kong, Fred Zimmerman, editor and publisher of the Asian Journal, described the ban as "unreasonable, unwarranted and self-defeating." 
He said the newspaper, which is 80%-owned by Dow Jones &amp; Co. of the U.S., is considering challenging the government's action in court. 

   In New York, Dow Jones's chairman and chief executive officer, Warren H. Phillips, said, "It is sad whenever a government decides to restrict the free flow of information. 
It is all the more sad in this case. 
Singapore is a nation that offers itself as an international business center. 
It is a nation in which we have operated as journalists and as a company for many years. 
And it is a nation which we always have held in high respect. 
We hope the government of Singapore will reconsider its action." 

   Joining the criticism, the American Business Council in Singapore said executives in the U.S. considering investment or expansion in Singapore "will now carefully consider the disadvantages of limited coverage of news affecting their operations." 

   The Reagan administration expressed dismay over Singapore's action. 
"Our support for a free press is well known," a State Department spokesman said. 
"We regret this action by the government of Singapore and hope that a way can be found to resolve the circulation restrictions on The Asian Wall Street Journal and the earlier restrictions levied on Time magazine." 

   The circulations of both Time and the Asian Journal were curbed in Singapore under an amended Newspaper and Printing Presses Act approved by Singapore's parliament last August. 

   Time magazine's weekly circulation was cut in two phases, to 2,000 from 18,000, after it initially declined to print in full a letter of complaint from James Fu Chiao Sian, the prime minister's press secretary. 
Although Time later printed the letter, Singapore hasn't yet lifted the restriction. 

   Relations between Singapore and the Asian Journal have been strained since early 1985, when Mr. Fu complained about the tone of an article on the resignation of Singapore's president, C.V. Devan Nair. 
Later that year, the Asian Journal was found guilty of contempt of court because of an editorial about Singapore's judiciary. 

   Last June, Singapore police opened an inquiry into an article in the Asian Journal about a commission set up to investigate allegations by opposition leader Joshua Benjamin Jeyaretnam that the government had tampered with the judicial system. 
The police twice ordered Stephen Duthie, the paper's Singapore correspondent who wrote the article, to report to them for lengthy questioning. 

   Although the Asian Journal continued periodically to publish complaining letters from Singapore officials, relations remained tense. 
A series of meetings in Singapore and New York during the past six months between government officials and Dow Jones executives failed to resolve the differences. 

   The latest dispute centers on an article by Mr. Duthie about a second securities exchange. 
Koh Beng Seng, an official of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, wrote to Mr. Zimmerman claiming that the article, which was published in the Asian Journal on Dec. 12, contained errors of fact and that Mr. Duthie was biased and prejudiced. 

   Mr. Zimmerman responded that an investigation had concluded that the article was accurate. 
He invited Mr. Koh to write for publication a letter stating his point of view on subjects dealt with in the article. 
He said the Asian Journal wouldn't print a letter attacking a staff member for unprofessional conduct of which the staffer wasn't guilty, and alleging errors of fact that didn't exist. 

   In a second letter, Mr. Koh proposed that their correspondence be published in full, including any further rejoinder Mr. Zimmerman might make. 
Mr. Zimmerman, in his second letter, expressed disappointment that Mr. Koh hadn't taken up his offer to write a reasoned statement of his views for publication. 
He noted that while he and Mr. Koh were exchanging letters, the Asian Journal had printed a letter taking issue with the article. 

   Mr. Zimmerman said a large part of the dispute could have been avoided if Mr. Koh hadn't declined to be interviewed by Mr. Duthie. 
He proposed a March meeting between Mr. Koh and the New York-based executive vice president of Dow Jones, Peter R. Kann, who plans to visit Asia then. 

   Mr. Koh has yet to respond to the suggestion. 
Instead, the government yesterday published an order in the government Gazette restricting the sale and distribution of the Asian Journal "until further notice." 

   Lee Seng Giap, an official of the Ministry of Communications and Information, notified Mr. Zimmerman that he could nominate a company to be approved by the government as the authorized distributor of the 400 copies of the paper to be allowed to circulate in Singapore daily starting Feb. 16. 
All such copies will be marked, he said. 

   Together with its statement, the government released the four letters exchanged by Mr. Koh and Mr. Zimmerman. 
However, it didn't mention that Mr. Fu, the prime minister's press secretary, sent two letters and a telex to Mr. Zimmerman urging publication of Mr. Koh's letters and wanting to know whether the Asian Journal would indeed publish them. 

   In his statement, Mr. Zimmerman said: "The government is depriving Singapore's business community of a prime source of reliable business and economic information. 
It is ironic that this comes at a time when Singapore is seeking to become a major financial as well as printing center in Southeast Asia." 

   The ban apparently won't affect the printing of the Asian Journal in Singapore. 
The newspaper is edited and printed at its headquarters in Hong Kong. 
Pages also are transmitted by satellite for printing in Singapore, from where the paper is distributed to Australia, New Zealand, India and several Southeast Asian countries. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
