ID: 270	RANK: 58	SCORE: 21.753407
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870303-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Singapore, Asian Journal at an Impasse
Over Order to Cut Circulation in Country
---
By Adi Ignatius
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FREST DJ
PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<TEXT>
   After a weeklong sparring match involving several public exchanges of correspondence, the dispute between The Asian Wall Street Journal and the Singapore government appears to be deadlocked. 

   Singapore has effectively banned the Asian Journal since Feb. 16, when it restricted the paper's circulation to 400 copies a day, in contrast to usual sales of about 5,000 copies. 
The government said it took the action because the newspaper refused to publish a letter from a government official. 

   Last week, the Asian Journal and the Singapore government traded an unusual series of offers and counteroffers relating to the paper's Singapore distribution. 
Both sides' proposals were made available to the media. 
In an odd twist, the Singapore government -- which earlier had criticized the Asian Journal for "engaging in the domestic politics of Singapore" -- at one stage offered to help the Journal financially in producing a special Singapore edition. 

   In a letter delivered Feb. 23 to Yeo Ning Hong, Singapore's minister of communications and information, the Asian Journal's editor and publisher, Fred Zimmerman, asked the government for permission to distribute the paper free of charge to all paying subscribers and hotel purchasers that were on the paper's rolls immediately before the circulation cut took effect. 

   "Many of Singapore's most important businesses are telling us that lack of access to the Asian Journal is making their operations more difficult," Mr. Zimmerman wrote. 
"We are willing to incur the expense of free distribution so that business people in Singapore can once again have access to the newspaper." 

   Singapore agreed to the plan, but only on the condition that the newspaper carry no advertising, except in the 400 copies already approved for circulation. 
"If the Journal was sincere, it should give the news to the people free of charge without advertisements," Mr. Yeo was quoted as saying by the state-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corp. 

   The Asian Journal declined the counteroffer, arguing that news and advertisements are integral parts of the paper. 
"Any suggestion that we should create and print a special edition each day for Singapore and then distribute it free of charge is unreasonable -- in terms of additional mechanical costs as well as daily scheduling problems," Mr. Zimmerman wrote back. 

   Singapore then made its offer to help pay for the production of an advertisement-free version of the newspaper. 
In a letter delivered Feb. 26 to the Asian Journal, Martin Marini, press secretary to the minister of communications and information, said Singapore offered to bear half of any mechanical costs involved in producing a special edition of the paper that would carry no advertising and be distributed free to Singapore subscribers. 

   Mr. Zimmerman promptly rejected that offer in a letter delivered to the ministry the following day. 
"All of us were bemused by your proposal that we enter into a partnership with the Singapore government to print a special version of The Asian Wall Street Journal with advertising censored out of it," he wrote. 
"I suppose this represents progress, since it was only a few days ago that the government decided to ban us from Singapore. 

   "News and advertising are integral parts of our newspaper. 
Beyond that, as a matter of policy we don't take financial assistance from governments," Mr. Zimmerman added. 
"We all look forward to the time when your government will join other non-communist governments around the world in allowing our newspaper to circulate freely in your country." 

   Singapore fired one last shot. 
"The Singapore government has the duty to govern Singapore," Mr. Marini wrote in response to the Asian Journal's rejection of the ministry's offer. 
"This includes deciding which foreign newspapers can be sold here, and under what conditions. 

   "We do not allow Izvestia or Renmin Ribao to circulate freely in Singapore," Mr. Marini added, referring to the Soviet Union's official government newspaper and to China's People's Daily. 
"But we have given the AWSJ this right to circulate, on condition that we can rebut your errors and misreporting in the manner of our choosing. 
If you choose to reject these terms, so be it." 

   (While the People's Daily isn't allowed to circulate in Singapore, as Mr. Marini noted, the Chinese Communist Party newspaper has supported Singapore's actions against the Asian Journal. 
"As a sovereign country, the Singapore government of course has the right to react in this way," the newspaper said last month.) 

   When the Singapore government announced on Feb. 9 that the Asian Journal's circulation would be restricted, it said it was taking action because the newspaper refused to publish an official reply to an article on a proposed unlisted securities market. 
The Asian Journal, for its part, said it was prepared to publish such a letter, but not one that alleged errors of fact that didn't exist and wrongly accused a correspondent of unprofessional conduct. 

   The Asian Journal, which is 80%-owned by Dow Jones &amp; Co. of the U.S., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, became the second publication to have its circulation curtailed in Singapore under the amended Newspaper and Printing Presses Act passed by Parliament last August. 
Time magazine's Singapore circulation was cut to 2,000 a week from 18,000 after it refused to print in full a letter of complaint from a government official. 
Although Time later published the letter, Singapore hasn't lifted the restriction. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
