ID: 249	RANK: 14	SCORE: 9.786792
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870305-0130 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

With Spuds, Thomas Edison
---
By Ronald Alsop
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 03/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> BUD
MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)
FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN>
<TEXT>
   BACK IN 1984, TV viewers were amused by a clever new commercial in which a man in a bar hollered "Gimme a light," but was served a flaming torch instead of a mug of beer. 
That, of course, marked the start of Anheuser-Busch's memorable "funny lights" commercials for Bud Light. 
Since then, there has been everything from a bug light to train headlights, and the ad campaign has consistently ranked as one of the 10 most popular on the air. 
Anheuser-Busch gives it much of the credit for Bud Light's sales growth of 32% in 1985 and 23% last year. 

   But now, more than 50 light gags later, the idea is wearing thin, and the company faces the inevitable question of what to do for an encore. 
It isn't an easy feat for a marketer, especially when the advertising is supposed to make people laugh. 
Consider Wendy's International Inc., which hasn't come close to duplicating the success of its "Where's the beef?" campaign. 
Or Stroh Brewery Co., which hasn't produced any blockbuster ads since its Alex the Dog commercial a few years ago. 

   "Humor is a very difficult act to follow, especially when you have a rigid one-joke format like the Bud Light ads," says Roy Grace, chairman of Grace &amp; Rothschild, a New York ad agency. 
"It's a little easier to keep a campaign going with more sophisticated humor like the Bartles &amp; Jaymes ads or the ongoing banter between James Garner and Mariette Hartley in the (old) Polaroid ads." 

   ANHEUSER-BUSCH is tackling the problem of its overworked joke in two ways. 
It is creating new ads that stick with the "funny lights" concept but freshen up the formula by moving beyond the typical bar scene. 
In addition, the brewer is expanding an offbeat marketing campaign for Bud Light that has been a hit in Hollywood and other trendy circles. 

   The unlikely star of this new campaign is a waddling English bull terrier named Spuds MacKenzie, who was expected to be only a short-term promotional gimmick for the college and young adult market. 
But "the original party animal," as Spuds is called, proved so appealing that he graduated this year to prime-time network TV. 
In the commercials, he hangs out on the beach and in nightclubs with a bottle of Bud Light and an adoring flock of beautiful women who chant, "Go, Spuds, go." 
The pooch wears a bow tie and dinner jacket and travels in a limousine in one spot; another ad shows him sporting sunglasses and a Hawaiian shirt and riding a skateboard. 
It's hardly the usual yuppie and macho beer advertising. 

   But Anheuser-Busch executives stress that Spuds will only supplement, not replace, the "funny lights" campaign. 
After all, they say, confusion about lights is an effective and entertaining way to deal with one of their major marketing challenges: persuading people to ask for the Bud Light brand in bars. 
When people simply order a light beer, bartenders are apt to serve top-selling Miller Lite. 

   THE CREATIVE STYLE of the light jokes will be evolving throughout 1987. 
"The funny lights campaign has begun to show its age, especially with people who got megadoses of it on sports programs," says Thomas Sharbaugh, group brand director at Anheuser-Busch. 
"But we still think we can get more mileage out of it if we come up with less predictable situations." 
Instead of taking place in a bar, for instance, a recent ad is set in a swimming pool where a fire-breathing monster answers the call for a light. 
Another new ad shows Thomas Edison in a library explaining how he invented the electric light. 
"Well, it's very nice, Thomas," his companion says. 
"But I wanted a Bud Light." 

   Spuds MacKenzie represents a far bigger change for Bud Light's image. 
What makes Spuds so intriguing is the fact that he was never intended to be anything more than a pin-up poster. 
It was a lucky accident that began when a young art director at the DDB Needham ad agency dreamed up the dippy dog in 1983. 
"But we didn't really understand the idea when we first saw it," says John Greening, management representative at DDB Needham. 

   Later, though, when the agency was considering a poster promotion for Bud Light, it decided to give Spuds his big break. 
The poster showing the party animal in a "Delta Omega Gamma" fraternity sweater sold briskly, leading to Spuds calendars and then last year, the first Spuds ads. 
They ran in California where, Anheuser-Busch executives say, the competition was heating up and Bud Light needed a jolt to increase its awareness level with consumers. 
Well-received in the West, Spuds finally made his bow on prime-time network TV during the Super Bowl. 

   IN ADDITION to advertising, Spuds is generating a bonanza of free publicity for Bud Light. 
The dog is scheduled for a cameo role in a Martin Mull movie and was invited last month to a party in Los Angeles for the Bangles rock group. 
What's more, Spuds merchandise is a growth business in itself. 
In a recent three-month period, a Spuds T-shirt brought in $1 million of orders. 
Also for sale: Spuds tattoos, hats, dog tags and an $875 costume. 

   "In our Spuds ads, we want to position Bud Light as the choice of with-it, young adults," says Anheuser-Busch's Mr. Sharbaugh. 
"But he has turned out to be one of those odd-looking things with an aura that people of all ages and life styles are drawn to." 

   There's always the chance, though, that Spuds could be just a short-lived fad. 
"It's novel beer advertising, but I don't think it has staying power," says Frank Assumma, management supervisor at the Backer &amp; Spielvogel ad agency, which creates commercials for Miller Lite. 
"There are only so many ways to dress up a cute dog. 
But who knows? 
Maybe they'll make it talk." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
