ID: 249	RANK: 16	SCORE: 9.672595
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870203-0074 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Fortunetellers' Tales and Other Spring Fictions
---
By David Brooks</HL>
<DD> 02/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Imagination is running riot, as usual, in the world of new fiction. 
Here, for example, are a few of the spring's more diverting plot kernels: A woman, buried in the rubble of a department store, has a love affair with an advertising executive trapped nearby ("Strangers," by Rosie Thomas). 
A woman is marooned on an island with a man named Robinson Cruso, and then, back in London, feuds with a novelist named Daniel Foe when he won't write her story accurately ("Foe," by J.M. Coetzee). 
A woman lies in a coma and makes witty observations to herself as her family sues for the right to pull the plug on the machine that's keeping her alive ("Extraordinary Means," by Donna Levin). 

   How do you decide which, if any, of those stories is worth reading? 
Most readers never venture into the unknown. 
They stick to the familiar names -- Robbins, Greeley, Forsyth -- even if that means passing by some remarkable and entertaining novels. 

   Fortunately, the familiar names often come through for us. 
Steven King's latest best seller, "The Eyes of the Dragon" (Viking, 326 pages, $18.95) is a medieval legend -- and not the horror tome millions have come to expect from Mr. King. 
It is told with the eloquence -- and humility -- of an aged fireside storyteller. 

   Mr. King's style begs you to underestimate him. 
He tells a simple tale about a prince wrongly imprisoned and denied his throne by an evil magician. 
But he folds in the sort of rich familial relationships that highlight the best children's fables. 
And his plot is so carefully constructed, and expertly paced, it is like watching those great old Disney animations. 

   There are other authors, not quite as renowned, who tell ambitious stories with wit and verve. 
Through them, the reader can push back the intimidating forest of contemporary fiction. 
Susan Richards Shreve is one of these writers, judging by "Queen of Hearts" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 354 pages, $17.95). 
Ms. Shreve's protagonist is a beautiful fortuneteller, the granddaughter of a mysterious vagabond who immigrated to a small Massachusetts town and made her living singing and soliciting in the local tavern. 
The young woman shares a mystical bond with her dead grandmother, and is by novel's end almost a reincarnation. 
The townsfolk are attracted and repelled by these far-seeing women. 
They don't know whether to build them a monument or to burn them at the stake. 

   Ms. Shreve has a genius for oddball characterizations: a small boy is obsessed with lion taming; a man, unable to mature, spends his days hunting river snakes and fending off his dead mother's spirit; a failed fortuneteller retreats to an attic music room. 
These are not cliche people-are-sick-beneath-their-calm-small-town-veneer weirdos; they are subtly odd, and in the midst of this refreshingly eventful plot, they are original and intriguing. 

   Unfortunately, Ms. Shreve's talents fail her when her catastrophe-laden plot slows, or when she must create mainstream characters. 
If they are not perverse, Miss Shreve's characters are likely to be flat and colorless. 
Her men are presented as social problems -- drunks, wife beaters, homophobes -- not individuals. 

   The hero in Thomas McMahon's "Loving Little Egypt" (Viking, 273 pages, $16.95) is not magical, but he can do magical things. 
Mourly Vold is a near-blind boy with a gift for electrical engineering and mechanics. 
In 1921, he discovers how to destroy the American phone system by making clicking noises with his tongue. 
He tries to warn phone company executives that the system is flawed, but they won't listen until he begins to disrupt the system. 
Alexander Graham Bell, Thomas Edison and William Randolph Hearst enter the picture, either on Mourly's side or against him. 

   The plot is awkward and arrives at a painfully contrived solution, but that doesn't matter, because the subject of this book is the inventive process itself. 
Mr. McMahon is a professor of applied mechanics and biology at Harvard. 
A hundred books about the creative process cannot convey the excitement and beauty of mechanical tinkering that Mr. McMahon portrays here. 
He draws a stark contrast between the madcap Bell, who is all inspiration and wonder, and Edison, a narrow-minded grind who ruthlessly pursues technological development. 
Mr. Edison is the book's villain. 

   ---
   Mr. Brooks is the Journal's book editor. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
