ID: 249	RANK: 17	SCORE: 9.661862
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871109-0057 </DOCNO>
<HL> SMALL BUSINESS:
States Play Expanding Role
In Funding Technology Firms
---
By Udayan Gupta
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/09/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)
COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN>
<TEXT>
   EVERETT ELLIN turned to state grants because he couldn't bring himself to try his luck with venture capitalists again. 
His first few encounters with those financial backers were "brutalizing," he says. 

   The Santa Fe, N.M., entrepreneur's strategy proved effective. 
Over a period of four years, he and his Scantech Corp. managed to obtain $550,000 in grants from technology programs in Ohio and Pennsylvania to develop a filmless X-ray technology. 
The grants enabled Scantech to complete much of its early work and helped raise almost $750,000 in new capital through a small private placement in six states. 
This year, after completing work on a second X-ray machine for use in industry, Mr. Ellin raised $200,000 more in a stock offering limited to New Mexico residents. 

   For a growing number of technology entrepreneurs, states are providing the initial capital to get their projects off the ground. 
But unlike venture-capital seed funds, which often demand a high price for investing in risky, early-stage companies, the state programs don't demand equity. 

   "They are funding technical feasibility well before the seed funds," says Pittsburgh entrepreneur Bruce DaCosta. 
Unlike venture funds, the state programs "allow for a great deal of freedom and creativity on the part of the entrepreneur," he adds. 
More important, entrepreneurs have used such grants to develop projects and receive additional funds from venture capitalists. 

   IN THE LAST FOUR YEARS, for example, Pennsylvania's Ben Franklin Partnership has provided almost $80 million to state-based technology projects, which have then gone on to receive $280 million in private capital. 
The Massachusetts Technology Development Corporation has provided more than $10 million in seed and early-stage financing to over 40 companies which have received $180 million more in private capital. 
"We are acting as catalysts for technology entrepreneurs making the transition from a small R&amp;D project into a product-oriented technology enterprise," says John Hodgman, president of the Massachusetts agency. 

   Under Ohio's Thomas Edison Program, an entrepreneur can receive $10,000 to $50,000 to establish the technical feasibility of a project. 
Once that is established, the program provides $50,000 to $250,000 to develop the project further. 
The grant doesn't go directly to the entrepreneur but to an Ohio-based university, which becomes a research partner with the company. 

   In terms of the money small, emerging businesses really need, "the total pool of capital the states are providing is insignificant," argues David Birch, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
But the symbolism -- states' commitment to the process of small-business development -- is very important, he asserts. 

   Indeed, the states' greatest contribution "is often that of introducing people to each other whose professional paths wouldn't cross -- and to provide some financial incentives to do so," says Anne Eskesen of the Innovation Development Institute, a Swampscott, Mass., concern that monitors federal and state grants. 

   AT SCANTECH, for example, the idea of a filmless X-ray machine came out of an invention by two University of Pittsburgh physicists in 1977. 
But it wasn't until 1983 that Mr. Ellin, a high-technology consultant, saw its potential and acquired the licensing rights to the technology. 
While the Pittsburgh physicists continued to work on a medical application, Mr. Ellin recruited two Ohio State University scientists to develop an industrial use. 
In the process, he received a total of $350,000 from Ohio's fledgling Thomas Edison Program. 
The funds went directly to the university, Mr. Ellin says, but they financed research and experimentation for which Scantech couldn't dream of paying. 
In 1986, Scantech's Pittsburgh group received $200,000 from Pennsylvania's Ben Franklin Program to develop a dedicated, digital chest X-ray machine. 

   "For state programs, the real emphasis is technology and the potential it has," says Mr. DaCosta, adding, "They don't have the market orientation that venture capitalists have." 
In 1986, Mr. DaCosta and his Iconnex Corp. received $100,000 from the Ben Franklin program to develop computer software for mechanical engineers. 
After the initial feasibility work was complete, the program provided him an additional $175,000 to continue. 

   In August, Iconnex successfully raised almost $3 million from a group of venture capitalists, including the venture unit of EG&amp;G Inc., Pittsburgh's Fostin Capital Corp. and Cornerstone Ventures, San Jose, Calif. 
But without the grant money to develop the prototype, "it would have been difficult to raise money from professional investors," Mr. DaCosta says. 

   ---
   EVEN THOUGH most technology programs are funded by state governments on an annual basis, the market crash doesn't jeopardize their future, administrators say. 
"Most of the capital for these projects comes from sources which have already committed the money," notes Paul Rice, who manages venture capital investments for Michigan's public retirement system. 
"The bottom would have to drop out of the market before we would withdraw from such commitments," Mr. Rice adds. 

   States see these programs as an integral part of their economic-development strategy, argues Jacques Koppel, executive director of the Ben Franklin Partnership. 
In fact, Mr. Koppel says "If the economy goes into a downturn, the programs might receive even greater emphasis." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
