ID: 249	RANK: 39	SCORE: 8.139983
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870331-0104 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Business Bookshelf:
Beyond Tycoon-Thrashing
---
By Neil Harris</HL>
<DD> 03/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Thomas DiBacco thinks American business has gotten a bad deal. 
Not necessarily from public opinion. 
Americans "have viewed business positively from the perspective of their times," he notes in his introduction. 
But rather from historians who either have ignored or attacked the business community, aided by "untoward events of recent times" such as the Great Depression, the creation of the military-industrial complex, and the character of American imperialism. 
As a result, "the good that business people have done over the years has been interred with their bones." 
With "Made in the U.S.A.: The History of American Business" (Harper &amp; Row, $19.95), Mr. DiBacco intends to set the record straight. 
In some 275 pages of text he undertakes, therefore, to provide an account from the landing of the Pilgrims to contemporary corporate philanthropy, a description emphasizing the central role of business in American life as a source of skills, ideals, values and goals. 

   The narrative itself is easy to read, divided into 20 chapters that mix conventional and unusual subjects with trendy titles. 
"Exciting Infrastructures" is the tag for antebellum transport and communication changes; "Rocky and Andy" describes not two rock stars, but John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie. 

   The chapters mingle brief biographical sketches, statistical summaries, selective quotation, and absorbing, occasionally amusing and sometimes provoking vignettes of business and technical genius at work. 
The cast of characters includes not only the traditional business pantheon -- Benjamin Franklin, Cyrus McCormack, George Pullman, Samuel Slater, Thomas Edison -- but a set of extraordinary innovators whose lives and personalities have not survived the passage of time: James Ritty, developer of the cash register, William Colgate of soap fame, Oscar Hammerstein, the impresario whose career as an opera magnate was built on the invention of a cigar-making machine, James B. Duke, the tobacco millionaire, Charles Strite of the pop-up toaster, and James C. Penney, founder of the store chain. 
Their stories, and the histories of a broad range of tools, appliances, conveniences, packages and fundamental inventions, are indeed frequently ignored in conventionally organized summaries of American life. 
Mr. DiBacco demonstrates their significance, and reveals the critical role of merchandisers in changing (and frequently improving) the quality of life enjoyed by a majority of the population. 

   But despite its effective syntheses and anecdotal appeal, "Made in the U.S.A." is not a persuasive book. 
It is not persuasive, first of all, because it ignores the work of a group of historians that has, in fact, studied American business and technology, and helped popularize their contributions: Daniel Boorstin, Alfred Chandler, Robert Bruce, Erik Barnouw, Brooke Hindle, Merritt Roe Smith, among them, none of whom is mentioned in the rather brief bibliography. (The book also ignores the work of a series of somewhat more critical historians, who have moved well beyond tycoon-thrashing in their writings.) 

   "Made in the U.S.A." is also not persuasive because of its errors and rather selective explanations. 
The 1896 election victory of William McKinley over his "mountebank" opponent William Jennings Bryan was not "razor thin," but rather the largest margin in 20 years, a landslide in contemporary terms. 
The treatment of American Puritanism and the exploration of its theological principles is oversimplified, even in a popular text. 

   "Made in the U.S.A." is not persuasive because of its omissions. 
Frick and Carnegie are described, but Homestead is buried in a single quotation; Rockefeller's philanthropies receive a well-deserved commentary, but not the Ludlow Massacre, an instance of labor violence; we get Herbert Croly, an apologist for bigness, but not its critic, Louis D. Brandeis. 
Also conspicuously absent are tycoons such as Jay Gould, Jim Fisk, Daniel Drew and Charles T. Yerkes, who did not count political honesty among their chief virtues. 
It seems unfair to attack the old muckraking historians of Matthew Josephson's day without even mentioning one of their principal targets: the corruption of politics by business interests. 

   If the history of commerce, invention and business culture has been badly served, it is not necessarily because academic historians have been hostile to the bosses. 
Such complaints have been perennial also among students of American invention, entertainment and recreation, journalism, design, advertising, sport, health and medicine. 
It is difficult to integrate such special areas into the larger history of the U.S. Within the last couple of decades, however, a series of pioneering works, armed with new conceptions and orientations, has demonstrated exciting possibilities. 
Recent studies of "consumer culture," for example, have transformed the passive victim of manipulative advertising into a more active and aggressive partner whose exercise of choice reflects value structures more powerful and more pervasive than those purveyed by manufacturers or merchants. 
Treated as a quick tour through some byways of our national history, "Made in the U.S.A." is an adequate and even entertaining guide, but as a serious effort to reformulate the history of American business culture it doesn't, as Mr. Heinz might say, "cut the mustard." 

   ---
   Mr. Harris is chairman of the department of history at the University of Chicago. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
