ID: 249	RANK: 44	SCORE: 7.844460
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880107-0040 </DOCNO>
<HL> FORM + FUNCTION </HL>
<AUTHOR> Stephen MacDonald </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AAPL WRPS FREST </CO>
<IN> UTI TEL HHP EDP </IN>
<TEXT>
      After Years in Eclipse,
   Here Comes the Sun
   THE OLDEST lighting source on Earth is making a comeback. 

   Architects began losing interest in sunlight shortly after Thomas Edison built the first practical incandescent lamp, in 1879. 
Electric lighting is indeed convenient, and it never sets or goes behind a cloud. 
But with the price of electricity climbing, more architects are installing systems that carry sunlight deep into a building's core. 
And there's a bonus that some architects say is more important than money: Natural light makes people feel better and work better. 

   But it's cost that usually attracts a builder's attention. 
At Broadmoor, a daylit Audubon Society nature center in Natick, Mass., designed by the Boston architect Gerard Ives, the lighting bill is one-sixth those at other society centers. 

   Because of the savings, utilities are beginning to offer incentives for customers to use daylighting. 
Southern California Edison, in Rosemead, has given grants for more than 300 buildings in the past three years. 
According to Gregg D. Ander, an architect and project manager at Edison, any building with a heavy lighting load can benefit. 
"We've done offices, retail stores, schools, industrial buildings -- you name it," he says. 

   There's more to daylighting than just adding windows, skylights and clerestories. 
Mr. Ives says the biggest challenges are to prevent glare and overheating. 
Another problem, says Harvey Bryan, an associate professor of architecture at Harvard University, is to coordinate electric and natural light. 

   Daylighting also brings changes that not everyone welcomes. 
Illumination in a daylit building varies with time, season and weather. 
"Building managers often like systems they don't have to touch," says Mr. Bryan. 
"With daylighting, you have to adjust the blinds or maybe pull down a shade once in a while." 

   Telltale Ring Signals
   That Special Call
   UNWELCOME telephone calls -- for example, from salesmen who seem to sense the exact moment you sit down to dinner -- have been a resilient problem, but help may be on the way. 

   A few years ago, call-screening devices seemed to offer a solution. 
The machines typically intercepted calls and asked the caller to tap in a code provided by the customer before they rang the customer's phone. 
But the idea didn't catch on, possibly because the price was high and passing out the codes a nuisance. 

   Now another approach is being tried, this time by the telephone companies themselves. 
Operating companies in Florida, Mississippi and New Jersey are test marketing service packages that give the customer some control over incoming calls. 
In one package, for example, the customer can store six phone numbers. 
The phone will then either ring distinctively if those numbers call, or the call can be shunted to a recorded message without even ringing the customer's phone. 

   A more powerful feature, Automatic Number Identification, has raised eyebrows among civil libertarians. 
It displays the caller's number, so the customer can ignore calls he doesn't recognize -- or does. 

   When Designers Think
   To Include Handicapped
   DESIGNING a product for able-bodied people so it's also useful to the handicapped sometimes requires only imagination, not much money, as can be seen in a couple of recent innovations. 

   Standard software for Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh line includes a file called "Easy Access" for people who can't type with both hands or have trouble manipulating the mouse. 
With the program, a command that usually calls for pressing two or more keys simultaneously can be invoked by pressing them one at a time. 
Another feature allows the cursor to be moved by tapping numeric keys. 
Apple declined to state the cost, but the programs are extremely simple. 

   Similarly, WearEver-ProctorSilex Inc.'s ceramic baking dishes have molded-in braille dots that tell the capacity. 
According to Marshall B. Johnson, corporate industrial designer at the Chillicothe, Ohio, company, adding the dots cost "practically nothing." 

   Odds and Ends
   GLASNOST TRICKLES down, as a top Soviet designer heads for the U.S. to sign an agreement of cooperation with his American counterpart. 

   This month Yuri Soloviev, president of the Society of Soviet Designers, will meet in New York with Peter H. Wooding, president of the Industrial Designers Society of America, to discuss "matters of mutual interest." . . . 
The great leveler? 
Using electronic mail in group decision-making tends to diminish the importance of the participants' status, according to a study of students at Clarkson University, in Potsdam, NY. 
The researchers concluded that electronic media are better for exchanging information than for "situations where the implementation of the decision depends on the distribution of power or implementing authority." 
The study also found that people are less inhibited communicating on electronic media than in face-to-face discussion. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
