ID: 249	RANK: 61	SCORE: 7.329700
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890831-0006 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890831 </DD>
<AN> 890831-0006. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
@  The Gallery: Celebrating the Frontier Fable
@  ----
@  By Eileen White Read </HL>
<DD> 08/31/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> Los Angeles  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Culturally speaking, this city has increasingly displayed its determination to found the sort of institutions that attract the esteem of Eastern urbanites. 
It's appropriate to applaud these civilizing influences: gleaming new palaces of art, an opera company, a triannual arts festival. 
But this imported culture at times seems a bit like an invading force, threatening to quicken the pace, lighten the suntans and irreversibly alter the self-image of a once laid-back citizenry. 

   Amid all this Easternization, two distinctly Western museums have arrived on the scene. 
In celebrating the lifestyle of the hero-on-horseback, both reel and real, they help breathe renewed life into the myth of California and the Southwest as a cultural frontier. 
It doesn't matter that this myth is about as genuine as the plot of a Tom Mix movie. 
What counts is that exploration of the myth brings insight into the American psyche's strange -- and still potent -- attraction to this region. 

   The Gene Autry Western Heritage Museum, the larger and more easily reached of the two, is an especially enthusiastic celebrant of the frontier fable. 
Inspired by its extensive collections of cowboy spurs, chaps, boots, hats, holsters and guns, you can plunk down $150 for a 10-gallon hat in its gift shop and feel as if you've won the West. 
The $54 million facility was founded and partly financed by the sprightly 82-year-old former cowboy crooner, who made a fortune in real estate, radio stations and sports teams. 

   The Autry has bucked the recent trend of downtown museums to which Angelenos might actually walk, Eastern-style. 
You need horsepower to reach the vaguely mission-style building of terra-cotta-colored stucco towering over the intersection of the Ventura and Golden State freeways. 

   By contrast, the General George S. Patton Memorial Museum is a tiny institution with a single paid staff member. 
But its location at the infamous World War II training camp in the Mojave Desert -- where a larger-than-life cowboy and his men prepared for battles that would transform them into heroes -- makes it well worth a visit. 
It's about a 2 1/2-hour drive southeast of the city, near the splendidly isolated Joshua Tree National Monument, out beyond the reach of smog and cellular mobile telephones. 

   Any historical museum has to come to grips with the conflict between the real and romanticized accounts of the same period. 
This conflict is particularly problematic where the West is concerned, because Western fiction, beginning with Owen Wister's bestselling "The Virginian" in 1902 and continuing through decades of "horse operas," has taken an extraordinary degree of license in its portrayal of life on the range. 

   Historians have traced the rise of Western myth-making to the turn of the century, when the frontier began to shrink and farming, or "sodbusting," caused a vast decrease in the need for the ranch hand -- the itinerant, semi-literate, poorly paid worker who nonetheless enjoyed better scenery than blue-collar workers back East. 
He was replaced by the mythical cowboy-hero, the embodiment of those idealistic, democratic values that were thought to be as endangered as the frontier itself: courage, self-reliance, fairness, love of the outdoors, imagination, optimism and respect for the rights of others. 

   The Autry has apparently decided against dwelling on this conflict, opting instead for what its curator calls "a blend of the historical and the mythical," apparently with the view that the "Western heritage" of its title is both real and imagined. 
The museum elevates actors such as Roy Rogers to the level of individuals such as Annie Oakley and Wyatt Earp. 
Its mission is entertainment, and the audio and video-laden exhibits in its seven permanent galleries were even designed by the division of Walt Disney Co. that creates attractions at the company's theme parks. 

   As such, the Autry is as much fun as a visit to Disneyland. 
Its centerpiece gallery features decades of Hollywood's best-known cowboy shows and radio programs, beginning with Thomas Edison's one-reelers in 1898. 
Celluloid stars from William S. Hart to Clint Eastwood are shown in a series of short videos, and display cases are filled with clothing, records, posters and guns from television shows such as "Have Gun, Will Travel" and "The Rifleman." 

   There are, thankfully, no videos of the urban cowboy, John Travolta, riding a mechanical bull. 
But reverential treatment, without a hint of irony, is given to an equally silly phenomenon -- the singing cowboy. 
This surely has nothing to do with the fact that the museum's patron, of "Back in the Saddle Again" fame, earned his spurs and the seeds of his fortune as a glamorous radio and television crooner. 
The one truly humorous touch in this area is a snippet of that cowboy "di tutti" cowboys, John Wayne, making his off-key film debut in a musical Western. 

   The museum galleries do contain artifacts of true frontier life that, if viewed carefully, help the non-expert focus on the contrast between fact and fiction. 
If you linger in the gallery devoted to homesteading, with its diorama of a campsite set against rugged mountains, you'll hear recorded readings from pioneer diaries that tell of fierce hardships mingled with hope. 
A chuck-wagon exhibit includes recorded Western folk songs, simple, honest stuff mostly sung a cappella by non-commercial artists. 
Follow this with a visit to the gallery devoted to rodeo performers such as the daring Ms. Oakley, and you can see the genesis of the mythical Western hero (or heroine). 
And you won't want to miss the exhibit of seldom-seen oil paintings of 19th-century California from the state's historical society, on view through Nov. 19. 

   Western myths are inadequate to describe the true-life exploits of the suburban Los Angeles kid who went on to vanquish Hitler's Desert Rat in Africa and lead the Third Army to victory in Europe -- only to die from wounds suffered in an auto accident. 
Shortly after the Pearl Harbor bombing, George S. Patton opened the Army's Desert Training Center in what was -- and still is -- the middle of nowhere. 
He wrote at the time: "From October to the end of May, the weather in the desert is what babies cry for and old, rich people pay large sums of money to obtain." 
What he didn't say was that the rest of the year the desert would be hell for men living in tents. 

   The Patton museum, a modest concrete building on the site of the training center's one-time headquarters, contains only replicas of Gen. Patton paraphernalia, the true articles having long ago been housed at Fort Knox. 
But it has guns, tanks, a room-size, three-dimensional contour map of Southern California and possessions of a few of the more than one million men who endured a Bedouin-like six months here. 
As word of the museum has spread, families of former camp mates have helped its curator build a rich trove of the everyday accouterments of war. 

   Visitors in four-wheel-drive vehicles can ride through the ruins of the camp, which in its heyday comprised 18,000 square miles, including parts of Arizona and Nevada. 
The museum is so remote that it doesn't yet have a telephone. 
But the nearby Chiriaco Summit truck stop, whose proprietor donated land for the facility, will give directions {call (619) 227-3227}. 

   Not to be missed is a video of life at the camp and reminiscences by officers who served under "Old Blood and Guts." 
He is shown wearing his two pearl-handled pistols on his hips, gunslinger style. 

   ---

   Ms. Read, a former Journal reporter, is a free-lance writer in Los Angeles. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
