ID: 249	RANK: 66	SCORE: 7.221824
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880204-0160 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letters to the Editor: Are Sciences and Liberal Arts at Odds? </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Norriss S. Hetherington's editorial-page article of Dec. 31 "British Empire's Sad Lesson for America" relies upon a false analogy between the attitude of 19th-century Britain and that of 20th-century America toward scientific education to support a quixotic recommendation that contemporary American college students majoring in the humanities should devote a greater portion of their curriculum to scientific studies. 

   When Mr. Hetherington relies on the British experience to predict a similar disaster for America unless we compel liberal-arts students to pore over scientific treatises then he goes astray. 
America is not, like Britain, a society historically dominated by an upper class determined by birth, rigorously trained in the classics, and philosophically hostile to scientific achievement. 
Quite the contrary, a defining characteristic of America for the past 200 years, beginning not later than Benjamin Franklin and Eli Whitney, has been the reward and encouragement of scientific research and technological innovation. 
In addition to these two folk heroes of the 18th century, it is a commonplace that Thomas Edison and Henry Ford have been two of the greatest role models of American culture during this century. 

   Our nation takes great pride in the fact that American technological achievement and engineering ingenuity have become famous throughout the world since the 1870s. 
And surely the princely economic rewards heaped upon technological innovators by American society are more than ample to encourage any young person in this country with an eye for the main chance and a gift for science to pursue his interests at the university level and beyond. 

   The idea that the beleaguered teachers of humanities in American universities somehow could stifle our gifted youngsters' enthusiasm for an education in science, mathematics and engineering is preposterous. 

   Few would disagree in principle with the merit of Mr. Hetherington's stated goal that students of the humanities should be led to understand the process of science and to appreciate the intellectual beauty of a scientific achievement, but it is ingenuous to argue that the implementation of such a goal will help solve a crisis in American industrial productivity. 

   Richard P. Wolfe
   New Orleans
   ---
   Mr. Hetherington draws vivid and accurate analogies between a citizenry's knowledge of science, the descent of 20th-century Britain, the ascent of 20th-century Japan, and the question of America's future direction. 
If the American Association for the Advancement of Science recommendations that he outlines are implemented, they will do much to improve the science literacy of our liberal-arts students. 
But I fear the recommendations will do little to keep them educated when they are finished being students. 

   Developments in science are occurring at an ever faster rate. 
This is especially true of the biological sciences that will play such a large role in changing our society. 
An introductory biology course taken in 1974 (when I took it) could not by itself prepare any liberal-arts graduate for an article on monoclonal antibodies or genetic engineering. 
For an individual 10 or more years out of college, an understanding of much of today's science is the result of that individual's recognition of the importance of the subject and his desire to continue learning. 

   In order for our colleges to educate our future economic and political leaders in scientific matters, the colleges will have to involve the most important element in any liberal-arts student's education -- those few professors of literature, history or philosophy who inform the students about what is important for a full life, and inspire them to continue their intellectual development after their formal studies are complete. 

   The best teachers are committed to instructing the individual, not just teaching a subject. 
And it is these teachers whom the liberal-arts students will heed when they are told that to be liberated in the future means possessing some "sense of control over a predominantly scientific and technological environment." 
Any effort to keep liberal-arts graduates educated about how science works must involve the liberal-arts faculty to be effective. 
Rhetoric in the course catalog about the importance of course distribution requirements will never substitute. 

   It may be ironic that a key to a lifelong education in science is an inspiring teacher of the humanities, but irony is a common motif in modern life. 
Ask any English major. 

   Stephen M. Cohen
   Director, Financial Affairs
   Yale University
   New Haven, Conn.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
