ID: 299	RANK: 11	SCORE: 29.853046
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881107-0129 </DOCNO>
<HL> Where Widebodies Would Have the Muscle </HL>
<AUTHOR> Jon Keller </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> AIR </IN>
<G> TRN JUS </G>
<TEXT>
   Two airplanes want to land at Boston's congested Logan International Airport at 8:30 on a weekday morning. 
One carries 200 Cub Scouts on their way to a weekend outing, the other holds two corporate CEOs heading for a crucial early morning meeting. 

   Which plane should get landing priority? 

   Under a controversial plan being floated by the Massachusetts Port Authority, operator of Logan, the scouts would get the nod. 
Even as the courts and the federal Department of Transportation review Logan's already implemented hike in landing fees for smaller planes, Massport is considering a second phase of its Program for Airport Capacity Efficiency, or PACE, that would give first call on landings and takeoffs during peak travel periods to large-capacity carriers. 

   "Airport capacity is a valuable resource which should be managed to promote the greatest level of efficiency as measured by the movement of people, not airplanes," says Massport Executive Director David Davis. 

   There's no question Logan has an overcrowding problem. 
The airport accommodated more than 23 million passengers in fiscal 1987, a 101% increase from 1976. 
The Federal Aviation Administration projects passenger demand will double again by 2010. 
But its congestion problems are only somewhat worse than those facing many of the nation's airports. 

   In PACE's second phase, Massport proposes dividing aircraft into eight groups: those with more than 300 seats, such as the 747; those carrying 225 to 300 seats, such as the L-1011 or DC-10, and so on down to airplanes with capacities of 30 or less. 
In all, 85% of Logan's capacity during peak hours would be assigned according to size. 
Remaining space for takeoffs and landings would be auctioned off to the high bidders. 

   This "priority reservation" system would in theory apply only to the rush hour periods of 7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
But as Mr. Davis noted in a recent speech, "any hour when scheduled operations exceed" the optimal aircraft flow "would be classified as a peak hour," raising the prospect of far-reaching access restrictions if Logan traffic continues to grow. 

   Even the staunchest advocates of deregulation support Massport's overall efforts to better manage Logan traffic. 
Former Civil Aeronautics Board chairman and deregulation godfather Alfred Kahn calls the PACE Phase One fee hikes "a large step in the right direction." 

   But to Mr. Kahn and other critics, Phase Two is a silly idea that tries to manage the passenger boom sparked by deregulation in a way that ignores deregulation's fundamental message -- let the market decide. 

   "I don't believe anybody should be rationed out," says Mr. Kahn. 
"If a corporate jet is willing to pay $10,000 to land at a peak time, let them do it. 
I'd prefer not to have Massport allocate but to price correctly and let the market allocate." 

   Dissenters to Phase Two offer pragmatic as well as philosophical objections. 

   Big airports like Logan rely on public money in the form of federal grants and fuel taxes, and therefore are constrained from such sweeping restrictions on access, argue some critics. 
Airport administrators in the West and Midwest wonder what havoc Logan's unilateral action might wreak on their business traffic to Boston. 
Small commuter and general aviation airlines are livid over the new landing fees and are fighting them on several fronts. 

   Although Massport spokesman Tom Champion insists "we have the ability to do these things on our own," that may not be the case. 
If an administrative law judge rules against Massport later this month, the Department of Transportation is expected to order the new landing fees rescinded, placing Logan's federal funding -- which accounts for nearly a third of its total operating budget -- at risk. 
Meanwhile, a federal district court ruling in support of Massport's prerogative is under appeal. 

   Most offensive to free-market advocates, however, is the criterion by which Massport proposes to limit takeoffs and landings during prime time. 

   "I have been generally supportive of the PACE program, but now they're running up against the inherent conflict of having to choose between different types of users," says Robert Poole, president of the Reason Foundation in Santa Monica, Calif. 

   Instead of arbitrarily selecting size as the means of establishing preference, Mr. Poole joins Mr. Kahn in advocating reliance on market pricing. 
"CEOs may have an extremely high value on their time and they might be flying a commercial airline, commuter plane or Piper Cub," he notes. 
"They ought to have a right to express their time preference by being willing to pay a premium." 

   PACE Phase Two reminds Fred Smith Jr., president of the Washington-based Competitive Enterprise Institute, of failed governmental experiments with high-occupancy vehicle express lanes -- or HOVE lanes -- on busy commuter highways. 

   "It's the HOVE lane mentality -- first government creates scarcity and then it misallocates it," says Mr. Smith. 
"Rather than trying to build its way out of infrastructure problems, Logan is experimenting with a rule approach, using an engineering rule rather than a choice rule. 
If they're going to invest that kind of political time and energy they should do it in a way that maximizes choice and efficiency." 

   Massport argues that's just what it is doing, and the whole debate may become moot anyway if the federal government or courts strike down Phase One. 
But there is grim humor in the specter of regulators and business squaring off over how to make Logan livable. 

   A major contributor to Logan's congestion problem is the fact that unlike other major airports, such as Chicago's O'Hare or Atlanta's Hartsfield, Logan has no parallel runways to allow simultaneous arrivals and departures. 
In 1974, as part of an airport expansion plan that would have swelled Logan's takeoff and landing capacity by 90,000 annually, $23 million was spent on initial construction of new runway 14-32. 

   Environmentalists and airport abutters howled, and in 1975 freshman Gov. Michael Dukakis, then famous for his anti-business reflexes, killed the runway plan. 
As recently as last year a Federal Aviation Administration task force urged completion of runway 14-32 as a key to increased airport efficiency, but Mr. Davis insists any plans for runway construction are "dead in the water." 

   Perhaps the Logan regulators have made themselves a bed they cannot sleep in, suggests Mr. Smith: "An ideology of radical egalitarianism that sees people as uniform blocks of mud is what gives you the idea that 200 scouts are better than two CEOs." 

   ---
   Mr. Keller is associate editor of The Tab newspapers, a Boston-area chain of 14 weeklies. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
