ID: 299	RANK: 50	SCORE: 13.635092
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870831-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):
Get Me Off the Plane on Time</HL>
<DD> 08/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> AIRLINES (AIR)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN>
<TEXT>
   How many times have you sped to the airport to be on time for a flight leaving at, say, 8 a.m.? 
You check in, find a seat on the plane and before long you've finished the paper and it's already past your scheduled departure time. 
The plane finally takes off at 8:30, and you suspect that the crew never intended to leave before that. 

   Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole believes some airlines are bunching flights at the most popular departure times and causing a tarmac jam of planes. 
She recently sent letters to seven major airlines demanding they end unrealistic scheduling practices or face fines of $1,000 for each flight that is late more than half the time. 
Last Friday she reached an agreement with six airlines under which they will operate closer to published schedules at four airports. 
She may also require that airlines publish their on-time performance record. 
Mrs. Dole has identified a real problem plaguing the traveling public. 
But her own agency is at least as much to blame as the airlines. 

   One of the easiest ways to reduce delays at the busiest airports would be to charge different landing fees depending on the type of aircraft and the time of day it wants to land. 
But federal law requires that airports charge only a "reasonable" amount for landing fees -- widely interpreted to mean no more than their actual costs. 
So airports cannot charge a nearly empty commuter flight or corporate jet more than a fully loaded 727 when both want to land at 6 p.m. on a Friday. 
A Lear jet landing at Washington's busy National Airport, for example, is billed exactly $8.70 for landing rights and $21 for parking. 

   The Federal Aviation Administration, which DOT oversees, has also been slow in expanding its experimental program at four Northeastern airports that allows takeoff and landing slots to be bought and sold among airlines. 
Thus, an airline with below-average passenger loads would have an incentive to sell its prime-time slots to one with busier flights. 

   Another big reason for delays is DOT's interference with airline-owned computer reservations systems. 
Since 1984, the government has enforced regulations prohibiting "biased" listings on the computer reservations systems (CRSs) used by 95% of travel agents. 
DOT requires that "objective" standards dictate which airline gets its flight listed first. 
For example, a priority listing for a Miami to Boston flight would go to the carrier with the earliest departure, the shortest flying time and the most direct routing. 

   Suppose you call a travel agent and say you want the first morning flight from New York to Chicago. 
Five flights at 7:00 pop up on the agent's screen. 
If an airline had a 7:15 flight it might be listed below the screen's edge -- even if it is cheaper and flies into a less congested airport. 
Naturally, every airline wants to be listed at 7:00 -- even if its flight is more likely to take off at 7:20 or 7:30. 
And most airlines will list a flight's arrival time based on its scheduled departure -- just to bump up a notch on the CRS display. 
All this can mean that 12 airplanes have the same scheduled departure time out of Newark Airport -- a guarantee of flight delays. 

   DOT argues that the airlines running the systems would otherwise spotlight their own flights to the disadvantage of competitors. 
But years ago there were similar fears that big supermarket chains would allocate the best shelf space to favor their "house" brands and drive small food producers out of business. 
The reality is that supermarkets find it pays to give best-selling brands the most prominent display. 
Imagine the confusion if a Department of Food tried to regulate shelf space so that there is no "bias." 
That is what is happening with CRS screen space. 

   Now, of course, computer systems are not quite the same as supermarkets. 
But they are the point of sale for airline service and if competition is to be encouraged, airlines should be able to allow point-of-sale merchandising. 
Why shouldn't an airline be able to pay for a flashing note at the top of the screen that says: "Scroll down to 7:15 for a bargain flight!" 
In blocking that kind of information exchange Mrs. Dole encourages airlines to compete in the only way available, crowding into single time slots. 

   Even before Mrs. Dole's threat, Piedmont and American began scheduling their flights more realistically. 
But some airlines, for example Continental, are skeptical about whether Friday's agreement will achieve its goals. 
The answer to scheduling stackups doesn't lie in more regulation but in allowing airports to charge more for peak-time use and the airlines to compete in marketing the same way they compete in setting fares -- freely and openly. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
