ID: 299	RANK: 53	SCORE: 13.364607
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880316-0124 </DOCNO>
<HL> In Waterfront Cities, Ferries Are Making A Comeback as an Option for Commuters </HL>
<AUTHOR> Daniel Machalaba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> TRA </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The temperature hovers around 10 degrees as Christine Kravec peers from a snow-crusted Manhattan dock over the dark waters of the East River. 
Among the passing lights there is no sign of the ferryboat Jack W. 

   On learning that the vessel is icebound in Highlands, N.J., 20 miles away, Ms. Kravec rushes uptown to catch the bus there. 
No matter, she says, she'll still take the ferry on her next trip to New Jersey. 

   In the 20 months since it began sailing New York Harbor, the ferry to Highlands has been delayed various times by ice, fog, floating debris, a storm and a collision. 
Nevertheless, the service is building a loyal ridership of commuters who, like Ms. Kravec, prefer it to land transport. 

   Ferries are making a comeback in several other U.S. cities, too, as an alternative to overcrowded highways and rail systems. 
While the new services haven't yet had much impact on commuter traffic, operators who hope they soon will are adding routes and expanding existing ones. 

   Harbor Commuter Services Inc., the owner of the Jack W, led the revival here. 
In addition to the Staten and Governors Island ferries, there are now four new operators, carrying more than 3,000 commuters to and from Manhattan each workday (most of the new routes run only during weekday rush hours). 
Moreover, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is seeking a private partner to help with plans to launch a $156 million trans-Hudson River ferry next year that it hopes will one day carry 4,500 passengers an hour. 

   Two years ago, Boston started a ferry shuttle to Logan Airport to bypass the traffic-clogged tunnel under the city's harbor. 
Inspired by the success of the service, which carries some 500 passengers a day and is now run privately, though with a temporary state subsidy, local businessmen are proposing as many as a dozen new routes between the city and its suburbs. 
Boats have also been added to the decades-old run between Boston and Hingham, Mass., and there are plans to increase parking at the dock. 

   "It's absolutely wonderful," says Barbara Waite, a Boston law clerk who cut her commute from Plymouth, Mass., in half to one hour when she switched to a ferry, at $2.75 a ride, last September. 
"I don't have to deal with the maniacs on the road." 

   Seattle, which has had an extensive ferry system since the turn of the century, put a high-speed catamaran on its Bremerton, Wash., run a few years ago and is studying additional routes. 
And some local businessmen who commute from suburban Washington, D.C., are proposing Potomac River ferries to bring them downtown. 

   Despite such growth, the new ferry operations haven't yet attracted a huge number of commuters. 
Ferry ridership nationwide currently totals just over 160,000 passengers a day, half of whom are carried by New York's subsidized Staten Island ferry, which charges 25 cents a ride. 

   Ross Sandler, New York City's transportation commissioner, points out that small, relatively high-priced "boutique" ferries like Harbor Commuter's boats "haven't yet made a significant difference in transportation patterns." 

   Among the obstacles are cost and convenience. 
Some New Yorkers, for example, complain that the fares on the new boats are often twice as high as bus fares and that the docks are far from their offices. 
Two ferry operators, citing low ridership, have already discontinued runs to New York, and the four that are left are struggling to turn a profit. 
"Ferries aren't a transportation solution except for a very few people who live and work near the water," says Boris Pushkarev, vice president of planning for the Regional Plan Association, a private New York group. 

   But some transit planners say the potential for ferries is enormous. 
New York Harbor, says Ralph Stanley, a transportation consultant and former head of the federal Urban Mass Transportation Administration, "is like an empty 80-lane highway." 
Mr. Stanley adds that unlike highways and rail transit systems, which take many years to build, ferries can be pressed into service quickly and at a fraction of the cost. 

   The new ferries are getting a boost from developers' plans to raise office buildings, apartments and marinas along dilapidated waterfronts. 
For example, New Jersey developers envision a network of ferries crossing the Hudson to connect their waterfront projects to Manhattan. 

   Ferry operators have also benefited from the abundant supply of crew boats idled a couple years ago by the slump in the oil industry. 
Harbor Commuter has brought 12 of the boats back from duty in the Gulf of Mexico, paying only $250,000 for some -- or as little as 25 cents on the dollar -- before renovation. 

   Some businessmen have even tested hovercraft and hydrofoil ferries. 
But John Westlake, Harbor Commuter's chairman, says hydrofoils would be easily damaged by the floating debris in New York Harbor. 
Hovercraft are noisier and costlier than regular ferries to buy and operate, and need more open water. 

   Ironically, it was the 1927 opening of the now overburdened New York-New Jersey Holland Tunnel that sped the decline of the trans-Hudson ferries. 
Charles Maikish, the Port Authority's director of ferry transportation, recalls that, to boost support for the tunnel, one government agency had produced a film showing Hudson River ferries stuck in ice, lost in fog and delayed by river traffic. 

   "Now," he says, "we could do a film about congestion on the blacktop." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
