ID: 299	RANK: 61	SCORE: 12.870917
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880601-0138 </DOCNO>
<HL> Terminal Gridlock: At La Guardia Airport, Passenger Surge Causes Delays and Congestion --- Lines Are Long, Roads Full, Gates Few, and the Sky Is One Giant Intersection --- Expansion? Forget About It </HL>
<AUTHOR> Laurie McGinley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<IN> AIR </IN>
<G> TRN </G>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   It's rush hour here at La Guardia Airport and the mood in the tower is grim. 
First, fog shut down one runway. 
Then, a glitch in the instrument landing system shut down the other. 
Six planes are carving circles in the clouds. 
To ease the tension, one air-traffic controller breaks into a chorus of a Beach Boys song, "Round, round, get around. 
I get around." 

   But, except for a few takeoffs, the nation's eighth-busiest airport effectively is closed for business. 

   La Guardia's problems will ripple through the nation's intricate and fragile air-travel system, causing delays and missed connections in cities as far-flung as Atlanta and Chicago. 
Such frustrations are all too familiar to frequent fliers. 
Here's what they don't know: America's big airports will get even more jammed. 

   Many of the nation's airports are old and badly overburdened. 
Federal Aviation Administration Chief Allan McArtor calls them the "Achilles' heel" of the nation's air-travel system. 
These airports were designed and built in a simpler age when flying was a mode of transportation enjoyed only by the daredevil rich. 
Today, airports are struggling to handle the vast throngs of the deregulated Jet Age. 

   Airports are coping, but just barely, and that has aviation officials worried. 
Since the airlines were deregulated, more people are flying, and flying more often. 
Air travel surged 60% to 450 million passengers in 1987 from 1978. 
The FAA predicts that number will jump to 800 million a year by the late 1990s. 

   The problem is that the surging hordes of passengers are flying into the same number of airports. 
Cost is a big consideration; building a new airport costs billions of dollars. 
A major new airport hasn't been built in the U.S. since Dallas-Fort Worth International opened in 1974. 
Only two new ones are currently planned, in Denver and Austin, Texas. 

   Although there have been some sizable airport expansions and in some places new runways are planned, many municipal airports don't have room to grow. 
They were built on the fringes of cities decades ago, and over the years, housing developments and commercial districts have grown up around them. 
"You can't just pave over the neighborhood," a Transportation Department official says. 
And even when there is room, community opposition to jet noise often kills expansion plans. 

   About 20 of the nation's airports are already considered "seriously crowded" by federal officials. 
La Guardia is one of them. 
The FAA's Mr. McArtor warns that the number could easily triple over the next decade. 

   At few places are the congestion problems more evident than at 50-year-old La Guardia, the busiest airport for its size in the country. 
Every year, more than 24 million passengers pass through its five terminals; the annual volume at the biggest terminal is double what it was designed to serve when it was built in 1964. 
On an average day, La Guardia will handle about 1,000 flights -- roughly one every 60 seconds from dawn to midnight. 
The result is congestion, harried air-traffic controllers and frequently irate travelers. 

   Passengers endure long lines for tickets, toilets, taxis and their baggage. 
"This is terrible," complains Thea Linker, while waiting more than a half-hour for her luggage amid several hundred increasingly unhappy passengers at the small Eastern Airlines baggage-claim counter. 
Access roads to the airport regularly clog, causing missed flights. 
Even finding a parking space can be an ordeal. 

   Space is just as tight on the tarmac. 
Earlier this year, a fuel truck hit an Eastern plane, denting the aircraft's engine. 
After a four-hour delay, the passengers were put on another flight to Florida. (Eastern declines to comment on the incident.) 

   "We're getting people through," George Peirce, La Guardia's general manager, says grimly, "but it's poor service." 

   Despite all of La Guardia's problems, the delay record for airlines using the airport is slightly better than average: Three out of four arriving flights and four out of five departing ones are roughly on time, according to the Transportation Department's latest report. 
To some degree, that reflects efforts by the airlines to account for anticipated delays at La Guardia by lengthening flight times in their schedules. 

   In terms of air-traffic-control delays, which are caused by bad weather, crowded airspace and equipment problems, La Guardia posted the third-worst rate in the country last year. 
Its record has improved somewhat this year, in response to changes in air-traffic-control procedures, but experts are anything but sanguine. 
They warn that in coming years air-traffic growth in New York will overwhelm the area's three big airports, La Guardia, John F. Kennedy International Airport and Newark International Airport. 
The result: sky gridlock. 

   "Unless we do something else to increase capacity," says Joseph Del Balzo, the director of the FAA's eastern region, "the system will collapse on us." 

   Nationally, the outlook is equally grim. 
Total passenger delays at the nation's top 50 airports will rise to 196 million hours in 1996, up more than 80% from 108 million in 1986, according to rough internal projections by the FAA. 

   There isn't a lot of relief in sight for La Guardia, either. 
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airport, plans to spend $320 million over the next four years to add a terminal, to improve the roads within the airport, and to lengthen a taxiway. 
That will allow maximum use of the space La Guardia has. 
But it will barely touch the basic problem: too much traffic for a small airfield. 

   Like most big-city airports, La Guardia long ago ran out of room for airfield expansion. 
Situated on a nub of land that juts out into Flushing Bay, it is hemmed in by water, houses, hotels and the Grand Central Parkway. 

   La Guardia is a civil engineer's nightmare in other respects as well. 
At the turn of the century, it was home to an amusement park, then a private airstrip. 
The city ended up with the property during the Depression, and it persuaded the federal government to build a municipal airport on the site as a public-works project. 
To build on the 650-acre site, millions of cubic yards of rubbish from the city dump had to be used as landfill. 

   High tides used to flood the airport in the 1940s and 1950s. 
On several occasions, it was completely submerged. 
Now, a 15-foot-high dike prevents floods, but the landfill continues to sink a bit each year. 
In fact, La Guardia has had to pave its two runways a number of times to keep them level. 

   In pilots' lingo, La Guardia is La Garbage. 
The nickname reflects not only La Guardia's unglamorous foundation but also the pilots' frustrations with the airport. 

   Some of their biggest complaints concern the runways. 
La Guardia has only two and they intersect, which considerably slows traffic. 
La Guardia can handle only 75 takeoffs and landings an hour. 
In contrast, Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport, with four parallel runways, can handle 164 per hour. 
On some windy days, La Guardia has to take one of the runways out of operation, and traffic slows to a crawl. 

   Years ago, to accommodate bigger jets, La Guardia extended its stubby runways out into the bay by building them on piers. 
Still, at roughly 7,000 feet in length, they are too short to handle landings by Boeing 747s, which carry more passengers and might ease some traffic problems. 

   Many other major airports, including Washington National Airport, Los Angeles International Airport and San Francisco International Airport, also have space and runway problems. 
They need to expand their airfields, but simply have no room to do it. 

   La Guardia has only 57 gates, but at peak hours dozens of more planes may be on the ground. 
When flights arrive early, pilots have no choice but to park the jet and wait for a gate. 
The gates and corridors were designed for smaller aircraft. 
Wide-bodied aircraft take up two gates, further snarling traffic. 

   Rush-hour traffic jams on the ramp are dismayingly common. 
Complicating the situation is the fact that airlines cluster their flights during peak travel hours of 7 a.m. to 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. 

   Every weekday, for example, eight flights are scheduled to depart at 7 a.m. -- and that doesn't include departures scheduled by commuter airlines, air taxis and private aircraft. 
Only one can actually take off on schedule. 

   There's congestion overhead, too. 
In addition to the commercial airlines' scheduled flights, La Guardia's 27 air-traffic controllers must keep tabs on an odd assortment of other flying objects: blimps, single-engine airplanes and traffic helicopters. 
In the summer, one controller says, "it's a zoo." 

   Adding to the congestion is the fact that La Guardia is at the heart of the New York Metroplex, the world's most complicated air-traffic pattern. 
The pattern includes Kennedy Airport, 12 miles away, Newark Airport, 24 miles away, and 40 smaller airports in a radius 50 miles from the Statue of Liberty. 

   Flight operations in the Metroplex are so delicately balanced that a mistake by an air-traffic controller can mean catastrophe. 
Last August, a Pan Am jet bound for La Guardia had to dive abruptly to avoid hitting a Trans World Airlines jet that was in its path. 
An air-traffic controller in the Westbury, Long Island, center had accidentally transposed the call numbers of two TWA jets and had given the wrong instructions to one of them. 

   Some safety experts worry that controllers have too much traffic to handle in complex airspaces that surround many of the nation's airports. 
Many say flatly that without new and bigger airports, congestion in the skies and on the ground will cripple the air-transport system. 

   The shortage of airport capacity, says Transportation Secretary James Burnley, is "the greatest threat in the next 10 to 15 years to aviation in this country -- and to the people who fly." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
