ID: 299	RANK: 63	SCORE: 12.724976
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880115-0096 </DOCNO>
<HL> Washington Wire: A Special Weekly Report From The Wall Street Journal's Capital Bureau --- Compiled by Ronald G. Shafer </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> MDEST FREST </CO>
<IN> ECO MON AUT STK SCR AIR </IN>
<G> EXE FED CNG TRN </G>
<TEXT>
   RECESSION FEARS EASE amid positive economic signs, but caution remains. 

   Strong new government data suggest surprising strength in the economy. 
Job growth is robust, capital investment has picked up and manufacturers report rising orders. 
"If you look at the data, it's hard to find any effect" from the Oct. 19 stock crash, says Commerce Undersecretary Ortner. 

   But top White House economist Sprinkel cautions that "it will be another three months before we have the data" to sort out the full effects for 1988. 
Administration officials also warn that a tight Fed policy could torpedo economic growth. 
But the Fed is reluctant to ease, worrying that a collapse in the dollar could fuel inflation fears. 

   The key to growth this year is strong exports. 
Trade figures due out today will provide a clue. 

   ISRAEL DAMAGES its image with anti-riot moves, but U.S. ties are firm. 

   The State Department receives an unusual number of angry telephone calls asking why the U.S. can't do something about Israeli crackdowns against Arab rioters. 
But despite U.S. misgivings, punishing Israel is ruled out. 
"That won't get {Prime Minister} Shamir to the peace table," says a senior U.S. official. 

   Mideast peace will be a topic at a still-unannounced visit this spring by Shamir as well as during this month's visit by Egyptian President Mubarak. 
But officials don't see any dramatic peace moves. 
They believe the protests ultimately will peter out because the protesters don't have clear goals or the staying power. 

   BUSH VS. DOLE: Few expect their personal cease-fire to last long. 

   Both sides claim to be taking the high road after recent spats. 
But Dole will be aggressive against Bush on leadership issues, and Iran-Contra questions remain. 
"This is a campaign, not a coronation. 
We will continue to try to draw him {Bush} out," says Thomas Rath, a Dole consultant. 
Dole increasingly stresses his electability among Democrats compared with Bush's. 

   Bush aides insist their man will try to hold his tongue. 
To show his emphasis on issues, the campaign plans "Ask George Bush" sessions in which he will answer questions from voters. 
One purpose is to show a contrast with the acerbic Dole style. 
But Bush advisers expect Dole to begin attacking again, and some doubt that Bush can avoid firing back. 

   Whether Bush finally feels compelled to respond, says Bush pollster Robert Teeter, "depends on the charges, depends on the effect they're having." 

   HART'S RIVALS probably won't confront him on the character issue at tonight's presidential debate in Iowa. 
Their private polling shows Hart fading, and some want to focus their fire instead on front-running Simon. 
But the Des Moines Register moderator or the GOP questioner is likely to raise the sensitive subject. 

   GEPHARDT GRABS attention in Iowa with a new TV ad that assails South Korea for tariffs and taxes that raise the price of a $10,000 Chrysler K car to $48,000. 
If he becomes president, he says, the Koreans are going to have to wonder "how many Americans are going to pay $48,000 for one of their Hyundais." 

   BALANCED LINEUP: The Democrats pick a Midwestern governor and a Southern woman as top officials for their Atlanta convention. 
They are Michigan Gov. James Blanchard to head the platform committee and Louisiana's Kathy Vick to run the rules panel. 
A black is expected to be tapped to be in charge of credentials. 

   MORE SHOCKS for Wall Street may be in the offing. 
A new round of post-Boesky indictments of Wall Street figures is expected this spring. 
The prosecutions would involve not only additional cases of insider trading but also such dealings as market manipulation and tax evasion. 

   TURBULENCE ARISES among policy makers over some aviation policies. 

   FAA chief McArtor riles his boss, Transportation Secretary Burnley, by unilaterally promising legislation on setting airport-noise limits. 
McArtor also opposes local proposals that would raise landing fees for small planes at Boston's Logan Airport. 
But Burnley aides say some of the ideas, such as higher peak-hour landing fees to ease congestion, may have merit. 

   Burnley is sensitive to the Reagan administration's renewed emphasis on letting states and localities make their own decisions. 
But both he and McArtor deny any conflict on basic issues. 
The FAA chief plans soon to begin a push for more commercial airports. 
One proposal will be to take over some military air bases. 

   Some lawmakers seek to make the FAA an independent agency, but the idea faces strong administration opposition. 

   MINOR MEMOS: Bush's tax returns for the past 14 years list seven different home addresses, including the Houston Club Building in Texas and the Republicans' Washington headquarters when he was party chairman. . . . 
After a speech by Robertson in Nashville urging pride in American products, his aides whisk reporters in two Mercedes-Benzes to the opening of a campaign headquarters in a house selling English antiques. . . . 
Haigspeak lives: Haig refers to the "Malthusian, self-flagellating, self-deprecating attitudes of the '70s." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
