ID: 116	RANK: 100	SCORE: 14.666043
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880303-0008 </DOCNO>
<HL> Pacification Plan: South Africa Converts Defiant Squatter Camp Into a Black Showpiece --- But First, Half the Population Is Evicted, Rest Is Offered Clinics, Housing, Toilets --- What Role Did Police Play? </HL>
<AUTHOR> Roger Thurow (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> AFRIC </CO>
<DATELINE> CROSSROADS, South Africa  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Not long ago, even going to sleep was considered risky in this blighted black squatter camp outside Cape Town. 
Shacks were set on fire day and night as a turf feud between radical anti-apartheid "comrades" and conservative vigilantes spawned round-the-clock violence and killing. 

   But today things are so serene that victorious vigilante leader Johnson Ngxobongwana, the de facto mayor of Crossroads, permits himself an afternoon nap. 
"Yes, it's very different here now," says Alfred Geli, Mr. Ngxobongwana's deputy. 
Speaking for his sleeping boss, Mr. Geli adds, "We want to work with the government. 
We want to be happy." 

   The transformation of Crossroads from violent and defiant to quiet and passive is one of the most remarkable changes wrought by South Africa's 20-month-old state of emergency. 
The emergency decree has brought a harsh era of detention without trial and a clampdown on civil liberties, and it hasn't ended political discontent. 
But it has cooled some of the country's revolutionary fever, and the change in Crossroads, long a tinderbox of dissent with its 90,000 squatters on 200 acres, is one of its proudest achievements. 

   "For years, Crossroads was a thorn in the side of the government," says Sampie Steenkamp, an official of the Cape Provincial Administration, which oversees Crossroads and other area black townships. 
"Now we see it as a showpiece." 

   What has happened in Crossroads illustrates how the government has combined social development with repression to coopt black leaders and win the hearts and minds of township dwellers. 
In the case of Crossroads, the residents who resisted the government's redevelopment plan -- more than half the population -- were chased out; those who supported the government plan were allowed to stay and receive the benefits of Pretoria's favor. 

   The lesson of Crossroads hasn't gone unnoticed in the country's other black townships: Those who go along with the government get the carrot, those who don't get the stick. 
And the stick can be fatal. 
Last week, 17 major anti-apartheid organizations were virtually shut down when the government banned them from engaging in any political activities. 

   "The government thinks it can win the hearts and minds of the blacks," says Alex Boraine, a former leader of the liberal opposition in the white parliament. 
"And it will clamp down on those who won't let their hearts and minds be won." 

   In Crossroads, the rewards began arriving shortly after the vigilantes' bloody victory over the comrades in June 1986 (an outcome welcomed, if not outright orchestrated, by Pretoria). 
Government bulldozers and architects moved in to begin an expensive and much-ballyhooed upgrading program. 
The charred shacks were cleared away, and the former battlefield was leveled to make way for real houses. 
Army tents were set up to accommodate homeless vigilante supporters. 
Running water and flush toilets were brought in for the first time. 
Plans were drawn for soccer fields, clinics and schools. 
White members of the South African Defense Force even distributed Bibles. 

   "Our church people were very happy about that," says Mr. Geli. 
"We want our people to know that the defense force is our friend. 
And the police, too. 
We must love each other." 

   But the transformation of Crossroads is also spreading hate, particularly in the direction of Mr. Ngxobongwana. 
After chasing away the comrades, Mr. Ngxobongwana, who once supported the anti-apartheid United Democratic Front, was recognized by the government as the leader of Crossroads and given the power to allocate the fruits of the upgrading program. 
With this patronage at his disposal, he controls every aspect of township life from inside his well-guarded compound. 

   As a result, Mr. Ngxobongwana is generally despised as a government sellout by the thousands he drove out of Crossroads, as well as by the broader anti-apartheid movement. 
They accuse him of cooperating with the government in exchange for influence. 

   "That man is such a fool," says Sophia Benge, a former Crossroads resident who operates a women's sewing cooperative on the outskirts of the township. 
"The government has him now." 
Adds a local social worker who also used to live in Crossroads: "Johnson is too much into the system. 
If I had a gun, I'd shoot him." 

   Anti-government emotion also runs higher than usual among the displaced Crossroads residents. 
More than 3,000 squatter families are suing the minister of law and order for a total of five million rand, or $2.4 million, alleging that police contributed to the destruction of the squatter camps by either taking part in or failing to stop the vigilantes' action. 
Some witnesses say that police gave explosive devices to the vigilantes and sat by idly while vigilantes set fire to shacks. 
The police deny these allegations. 

   The pacification of Crossroads has brought new problems elsewhere as well. 
Squatters driven out of Crossroads, for instance, have simply rebuilt their shacks in nearby townships, taking their frustration and anger with them. 

   In recent weeks, a neighboring squatter camp called KTC has erupted in violence, with rival factions clashing over leadership and over community-sponsored upgrading plans. 
Suspicion is rife that the government is stirring up the trouble. 

   Samuel Langa, a builder who lived in Crossroads before he was driven out, has a strong sense of having seen all this before. 
"I don't know who," he says, "but there is someone inside, someone with money, who says, 'Please try to divide these people. 
I want to rule them.'" 

   The government, though, argues that its upgrading schemes are a unifying, calming force, and it is aggressively promoting them around the country. 
In Alexandra, the crowded and dirty township set amid the wealth of Johannesburg's northern white suburbs, the government detained anti-apartheid activists, smashed their organizations and then offered community upgrading. 
Under a 92 million-rand plan, Alexandra residents are getting telephones, electricity, storm drains, paved roads, and houses that they can own. 

   "You cannot have security in the townships unless you have decent services," says a white on Alexandra's administration board. 
A cartoon pamphlet explaining "how to look after a flush toilet" was recently distributed in the township. 

   In Khayelitsha, a new township rising out of the sand dunes east of Cape Town, the construction of a seaside resort, complete with barbecue pits, was given a higher priority than most housing. 
And in Botshabelo, a huge dumping ground for displaced blacks in the Orange Free State, a modest improvement in physical services is being supplemented with spiritual upliftment: Before Christmas, the South African police distributed holiday greetings bearing the message "We are here to help you enjoy the real spirit of Christmas." 

   Meanwhile, in Crossroads, the battle for hearts and minds already seems to be won. 
Most residents still live in shacks made of corrugated iron, plywood and cardboard signboards. 
But they have been told that somewhere there is a place for them in the upgrading program, which will result in houses, running water and flush toilets for 35,000 people. 
They can already see the first 40 houses that have gone up, and many of them sneak over to take advantage of the water taps and toilets on the unfinished sites. 

   "We're told the houses will be ready by winter, before the rains," says a middle-aged Crossroads resident who runs a fruit stand. 
"That will make us happy." 

   In return for this happiness, all Mr. Ngxobongwana and his supporters have to do is uphold their end of the bargain. 
"The comrades will never come back to Crossroads again," says Mr. Geli, a confident smile brightening his face. 
"Our mayor, he don't like trouble." 

   Mr. Geli sits vigilantly on a plastic chair atop a wide concrete slab, the foundation for Mr. Ngxobongwana's new house. 
Next door, two rifle-toting guards patrol outside the shack where Mr. Ngxobongwana is sleeping. 

   For now, the fighting is in KTC. Mr. Geli makes a sweeping motion with his hands. 
"If the government asked us to sweep out KTC," he says, "we'd sweep it out. 
They're troublemakers there." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
