ID: 192	RANK: 34	SCORE: 23.529909
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890818-0138 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890818 </DD>
<AN> 890818-0138. </AN>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
@  The Double Life of Nigel Tully
@  ----
@  By Terry Trucco </HL>
<DD> 08/18/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<DATELINE> London  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Nigel Tully is a 45-year-old Londoner. 
See if you can guess what he does for a living. 

   Mr. Tully is a businessman who works with computers and electric guitars. 
Sometimes he wears a pin-stripe suit to work, but often he dresses casually, in an open-collar shirt. 
He travels all over Britain, with occasional forays to the Continent, the Middle East and White Plains, N.Y. 
He frequently works nights, usually starting at about 10 p.m. 
But he works days, too. 
Hint: a rock 'n' roll band is involved. 

   He manages the band, right? 
Yes, but there's more. 
He plays in the band? 
Right again, but keep going. 
He works for IBM? 
You're getting warmer. 
All of the above? 
Bingo. 

   With his Jiminy Cricket spectacles, Nigel Tully looks a bit like Clark Kent, which is appropriate since he leads a double life. 
By day he's an account executive in marketing for IBM (he's handled the British Telecom account for 12 years). 
And at night he grabs his electric guitar, saxophone and harmonica and jives with his five-man rock 'n' roll dance band, the Dark Blues. 

   You probably haven't heard of the Dark Blues, but that just means you haven't attended the right parties. 
The band, formed in 1962 when Mr. Tully was a physics student at Oxford, has played at countless society weddings, debutante parties, bar mitzvahs and hunt balls all over Britain. 
Harpers and Queen, the English society magazine, calls them "Britain's most popular party musicians." 

   They played at Windsor Castle when Princess Anne made her debut in society. 
They played at Buckingham Palace when the Queen and Prince Philip celebrated their 25th wedding anniversary. 
And they were back at the palace last November for Prince Charles's 40th birthday party, playing hits by Stevie Wonder, Simon &amp; Garfunkel and Michael Jackson. (Mr. 
Tully's drawing room is graced by a framed note from the future king, thanking him for "playing so energetically.") 

   Britain's royals aren't the only bluebloods who boogey to the Dark Blues. 
King Hussein of Jordan flew the band out twice in the late 1970s. 
It played for guests that included the Shah of Iran at the king's private beach in Aqaba near the Israeli border. 
"Israeli radar kept coming through our amplifiers," Mr. Tully recalls. 

   They also played for parties thrown by Mr. and Mrs. Charles Price during his recent stint as U.S. ambassador to Britain. 
Princess Diana attended one and requested the Glenn Miller hit, "In the Mood." 

   "The important thing always is to make people dance," says Mr. Tully, seated in his London home after watching his nine-year-old son play cricket on a non-gig night. 
"What I love is when the crowd wave their arms in the air and shout for more at two o'clock in the morning." 

   The Dark Blues, who perform 120 times a year, usually play "Land of a Thousand Dances," the old James Brown hit, to get people jumping, but with a repertoire of more than 2,000 songs, there's plenty of choice. 
They play everything from Glenn Miller to Madonna, the Supremes to Strauss (the Blue Danube gets dusted off when they need a waltz). 
"We make Bruce Springsteen's sets look short," says Mr. Tully. 

   Among the songs they played at Prince Charles's birthday party were "Rock Around the Clock," "American Pie," "Billie Jean," the old Elton John hit "Your Song" (the singer was at the party), and "God Save the Queen." 

   "We didn't do anything very way out because it was a gentle sort of ball," says Mr. Tully. 
Indeed, the band had learned all the songs on Michael Jackson's "Bad" album, a special favorite of the Princess of Wales, but decided hits like "Dirty Diana" weren't quite right for the occasion. 

   "There are two types of live party bands," says Mr. Tully, turning philosophical. 
"One kind goes on stage and knows exactly what they'll play that night. 
But we never know what we'll play." 
As band leader, Mr. Tully sizes up the crowd, the moment and the mood, then chooses a song that seems appropriate. 

   The songs have changed, but the approach dates from the days when Mr. Tully, a native of Birmingham, formed his first band, The Fourbeats, while a student at Oxford University. 
Like most British rock buffs back then, his idols were American -- James Brown, Roy Orbison, Bo Didley, Otis Redding and Elvis. 

   But Mr. Tully didn't care about writing his own songs or developing his own sound. 
"All I wanted was to reproduce their music as well as I could, note for note," he says. 
And that's what his band has always done. (The name Dark Blues is a pun on Oxford's colors and "the blues.") "I was very, very commercial," says Mr. Tully, who sported bell-bottom trousers and flower-power shirts in the '60s. 
"I wanted applause, I wanted a successful band, and I wanted people to enjoy it." 

   He also wanted to continue playing after Oxford, which was one reason he went to work for IBM upon graduation in 1964. 
Big Blue offered him a job in London, the center of the universe for British party bands, and he has never moved. 

   The bigwigs at IBM, in turn, have never complained about his musical moonlighting or his hair, which was fashionably long in the '70s, at least by rock-music standards. 
The band, which currently gets $2,400 per gig, has played at a number of IBM parties, including a five-day gathering in Morocco for top sales people this summer. 

   Mr. Tully, who is married and has two children, plans to press on with his music, like Mick Jagger, Eric Clapton and other aging rockers of his generation. 
The band already has many confirmed bookings for 1991, including a hunt ball organized by Mr. Tully's wife, Prue. (The couple met in 1975 when Prue hired the Dark Blues to play.) 

   And there's always the chance of another royal engagement, though Mr. Tully insists the last fulfilled the wish of a lifetime. 
Pop singer Phil Collins also performed at Prince Charles's party, and on a souvenir map of Buckingham Palace given to party guests, the Dark Blues received top billing over the famous Mr. Collins. 
Nigel Tully grins. 
"It's my most prized possession." 

   ---

   Ms. Trucco is a free-lance journalist based in London. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
