ID: 192	RANK: 91	SCORE: 20.196634
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880115-0143 </DOCNO>
<HL> Britain's Princess Di Scores Hat Trick Against Fleet Street's Persistent Hacks </HL>
<AUTHOR> Paul Hemp (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> EUROP </CO>
<IN> PUB </IN>
<DATELINE> SANDRINGHAM, England  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A green Range Rover appears out of the mist at a remote crossroads near the British royal family's Norfolk estate. 
As it whizzes past, a cry goes up from the small pack of reporters huddled in the cold: "She was wearing a fur hat!" 

   The Fleet Street hacks jump in their cars and roar off in hot pursuit of Diana, the Princess of Wales. 
If the hat is made of authentic -- rather than fake -- fur, it would raise serious questions about the princess's commitment to animal rights. 

   "That would be very controversial," says James Whitaker, a reporter for London's Daily Mirror, at Sandringham to cover a royal pheasant shoot. 
"I'd be surprised if it was real fur, but if we could establish that it was -- well, that would make a story." 

   It would also be the latest in a series of royal gaffes by Britain's "young royals" -- gaffes that have been welcome fodder for tabloid journalists starved for scandal. 
Their coverage has riled those who say the press doesn't play by the rules as it stalks its prey. 
The several dozen reporters and photographers who hound the family are blamed for turning the monarchy into a royal soap opera -- a "Palace Dallas." 

   In fact, the royals need the press -- to keep public interest in the monarchy alive -- as much as the press needs them. 
And in action, the reporters more resemble the Keystone Kops than cruel hunters. 
As they race around country roads trying to get a glimpse of the royal hat, their madcap pursuit is foiled by Scotland Yard detectives who block their path or lure them down blind alleys. 

   Mr. Whitaker, who has covered the royals for 17 years, leaves London before dawn to arrive at Sandringham when the shoot begins at 9:30 a.m. 
The veteran royal watcher -- a boyish-looking 47 years old -- shocked the world six years ago when he and his photographer caught a pregnant Diana in her bikini in the Bahamas. 
Today, he is still hot on her trail. 

   Over the years, he has taken on some of the characteristics of the gentry he pursues. 
"I'd much rather be shooting with them than following them around," he says wistfully. 

   Most journalists, hard-bitten cynics on the surface, deep down want to be accepted by their royal prey, Mr. Whitaker believes. 
"Take any tough Fleet Street editor or reporter: If Fergie {the former Sarah Ferguson, now wife of Prince Andrew, the Duke of York} smiles at us, we roll over on our backs and want our tummies rubbed," he says. 

   Today, Mr. Whitaker is doubtful there will be a big story. 
Princes William and Harry, two important newsmakers, have returned to London for school after the weekend. 
Mr. Whitaker's friend and rival, Harry Arnold of the Sun, exclusively reported the previous day that William's nanny spanked him for teasing the royal hunting dogs. 

   But Mr. Whitaker is proud of the Mirror's coverage when the family left London by train the previous week. 
"We got William with his teddy bear," he boasts. 
"We were the only paper to have it." 

   Mr. Whitaker is clearly fond of Diana, whom he tracked for 16 hours a day during her courtship with Charles. 
During that period, the reporter sent her roses, called her every day and gave her encouragement. 
"I'd say, 'Has he asked you to marry him yet? 
He'd be a fool if he didn't,'" recalls Mr. Whitaker. 

   Throughout the morning, the reporters -- whom their photographers disparagingly call "caption writers" -- try to get close enough to their quarry to spot missteps or indiscretions. 
They might bag a nice story if Diana shoots a gun for the first time, Mr. Whitaker says. 

   But after the princess is spotted in her hat, the stakes rise. 
There are good-natured confrontations with Scotland Yard detectives blocking side roads. 
But the royals are sighted only in the distance. 

   Despite such difficulties, Mr. Whitaker's job has served him well. 
He has traveled the world on royal tours and become somewhat of a celebrity himself. 
He says he makes more than $82,000 a year in salary, free-lance fees and appearances on U.S. television. 
And he has had some memorable scoops, including the story that Diana was becoming anorexic. 

   He says his work satisfies the needs of a legitimately curious public -- and sometimes achieves even more laudable ends. 
Though it eventually became clear the princess wasn't suffering from anorexia, that didn't faze Mr. Whitaker. 
His article, he believes, was just the shock needed to warn the princess. 
"I will take credit for preventing her from becoming anorexic," he says without a trace of irony. 

   Finally, the royals and their guests are tracked to a hunting lodge, where they are having lunch. 
The reporters and photographers, lugging cameras with lenses the size of megaphones, line up near the driveway. 
They want a good look at that hat. 

   Figures emerge from the lodge and climb into the Range Rovers. 
Engines roar. 
The photographers are poised for a clear shot. 
But as the Fleet Street shooting party waits expectantly, the other one escapes across the field behind the lodge. 

   "She was definitely bareheaded," reports one photographer looking through his telescopic lens. 
Concludes a disappointed Mr. Whitaker: "There's no story today, just a bit of royal-baiting." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
