ID: 133	RANK: 11	SCORE: 18.169771
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870629-0141 </DOCNO>
<HL> Derailed Merger:
Plan to Join Santa Fe,
Southern Pacific Faces
A Possible Final Blow
---
How Errors by Management,
Red Tape Blocked Deal;
ICC May Act Tomorrow
---
The 'Pricing Freedom' Memo
---
By Judith Valente and Daniel Machalaba
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 06/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   In 1983, executives of the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway devised a plan that seemed as solid as the carrier's granite track beds: create a giant new railroad by acquiring the rival Southern Pacific. 

   But four years later, one of the biggest mergers in rail history is falling apart. 
Although the parent companies have combined their assets, management errors and regulatory red tape have repeatedly delayed the blending of the two railroads, which are still held in separate units. 
Employee morale at both railroads has plunged, and contracts have been lost. 
In April, frustration over the ill-fated merger led to the ouster of Chairman John J. Schmidt. 
In California's San Joaquin Valley, stretches of track that were built to join the two railways end abruptly in the dirt. 

   But even as the two railroads and their parent, Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp., struggle with these problems, a much bigger one may be about to hit. 
The Interstate Commerce Commission, which rejected the merger of the two lines in a decision last year, may vote at its scheduled meeting tomorrow to reject an appeal to reconsider the case. 
Although the agency could still change its mind, such a decision would be a consistent end to one of the most disaster-prone acquisitions in business history. 

   "It's a corporate and political mess that's positively stupefying," says William L. Withuhn, a railroad historian at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington. 
He adds that he can't remember a more "complex, tragic and confused railroad merger proposal." 

   If the commission does the unexpected and reopens the case, the review could last for years. 
That would probably be worse for the company than to bring the matter to a close now. 

   The failure of the merger could significantly alter the railroad map in the Westand possibly beyond. 
In addition to their colorful histories, both lines are major rail links. 
The Santa Fe's greatest strength is its high-speed route between Chicago and Los Angeles, which Judy Garland helped immortalize in the Johnny Mercer/Harry Warren song "On the Atchison, Topeka and the Santa Fe." 
The Southern Pacific, meanwhile, carries major quantities of the nation's lumber, produce, chemicals and merchandise containers. 
It also played a major role in developing California and was once the state's biggest private landowner. 

   An ICC decision would probably include an order for the parent company to immediately divest itself of at least one of the railroads. 
Although the two carriers might be able to operate independently for some time, it is more probable that one or both would be sold to other railroads either as single entities or in pieces. 
In fact, one of the lines could end up in the hands of an East Coast railroad, forming the nation's first transcontinental carrier at a time when coast-to-coast rail traffic is surging because of heavy container traffic from Japan and the Far East. 

   The two railroads may have been the victims of bad timing. 
A few years before their proposed combination, the ICC had easily approved the big mergers that created the Norfolk Southern, the CSX and the Union Pacific. 
In arguing their case, the Santa Fe and the Southern Pacific maintained, among other things, that the earlier decisions entitled them to similar treatment. 
And many in the industry believed that the proposal would fly through all government hearings with little problem. 

   But when the Santa Fe and the Southern Pacific brought their case, the ICC was under increasing pressure from Congress to re-regulate the railroad industry. 
In addition, the carriers may have been overconfident. 
In any case, they presented a case that was filled with contradictions and errors. 
"It was an ecstasy of fumbling," says an ICC official. 
Commissioner Malcolm M.B. Sterrett adds that the hearing record was "replete with self-contradictory testimony, omissions and fuzziness." 

   The Santa Fe and the Southern Pacific started discussing a merger in the summer of 1980. 
But talks broke off after the two sides failed to agree on a price or a plan. 
One problem was a personality clash between the two railroads' leaders. 
John Shedd Reed, the Yale-educated chairman of the Santa Fe, was known for his genteel style. 
Benjamin Biaggini, the strong-willed Louisianian who headed the Southern Pacific, liked to play tough. 
Once, in the middle of a bumpy rail trip, he stopped the train and ordered the manager responsible for track maintenance to get off and stay out of the office until the tracks had been repaired. 

   In 1983 Mr. Reed retired, and his successor, John Schmidt, almost immediately resurrected the idea of a merger. 
Deregulation had led to a wave of big railroad combinations, and Mr. Schmidt, a lawyer with a deep concern for the bottom line, was worried about the consequences of being left out. 
This time, Mr. Biaggini agreed. 

   The two companies were so confident of success that they merged their parent companies - including their real-estate, pipeline, mineral and timber interests -- without waiting for the ICC to complete its review. 
Because federal law forbids merging railroads without ICC approval, they left the two carriers in separate subsidiaries. 
But they began repainting the locomotives with the red and yellow color scheme of the merged railroad. 

   From an antitrust standpoint, railroad merger cases tend to be complicated because they involve a wide range of interested parties from many locations. 
Until 1976, when Congress imposed a 31-month time limit on ICC merger proceedings, some rail cases dragged on interminably. 
Many in the industry blamed the collapse of the Chicago, Rock Island &amp; Pacific Railroad on a decade-long ICC review. 

   But the process is still costly and exhaustive. 
Before the commission made its initial ruling in the Santa Fe/Southern Pacific case, it heard testimony from 130 witnesses, reviewed 600 exhibits and read more than 18,000 pages of transcripts. 

   Despite uncountable hours of preparation, the two railroads turned out to be their own worst enemies. 
A Santa Fe witness testified that the merger wouldn't reduce competition because the two railroads -- both of which operate primarily in the West -- don't overlap much in the types of cargo that they carry. 
But the same witness later tried to make the point that other railroads that carted even one ton of any type of cargo would constitute a competitive threat to the combined Santa Fe/ Southern Pacific. 

   At another point, Santa Fe's lawyers argued that competition from trucks would mitigate the effects of the merger. 
But the company's chief witness on the subject testified that trucks can't carry many bulk commodities as cheaply and efficiently as railroads. 

   The most apparent inconsistencies had to do with Santa Fe's estimates of the financial strength of the Southern Pacific. 
First, the Southern Pacific filed affidavits saying that it would be viable for years to come. 
Later, Mr. Schmidt said that the Southern Pacific was close to bankruptcy. 
Investment bankers for the railroads variously estimated the worth of the Southern Pacific at $800 million and at a negative $200 million. 

   At one point, a flood of mail began to pour into the commission from rail customers who said they supported the merger. 
But ICC staff members noticed that each letter misspelled the name of the ICC's executive secretary, Noreta R. McGee. 
Instead of impressing the ICC, the campaign helped lead to an inquiry into whether the railroads were unduly pressuring customers to support the merger. 

   The smoking gun, however, turned out to be a confidential report from Mr. Schmidt to the board about the pricing advantages of the merger. 
The memo said that the combination would help the railroads achieve "pricing freedom" and that one of the goals was a rail monopoly in California and the Southwest. 
Although Santa Fe succeeded in persuading the commission to keep the report under seal, the ICC later referred to the memo as a "candid appraisal . . . unlike expert testimony and legal argument" of the true view of the Santa Fe railroad's management. 

   Last July, following a mere 17-minute discussion, the commission voted 4-1 to reject the merger as anti-competitive. 
The decision was unexpected, and it stunned the industry. 
Santa Fe had to cancel a luncheon with securities analysts scheduled for that day on the benefits of a favorable ICC ruling. 

   Few, however, were more surprised than Mr. Schmidt. 
Calling the decision a "horrible mistake," he vowed a grassroots campaign to overturn it and ordered the company's lawyers to petition the ICC to reopen the case. 

   Privately, though, some Santa Fe board members were already blaming Mr. Schmidt for the commission's decision. 
In addition to the memo, some faulted him for being undiplomatic throughout the process. 
Indeed, afraid that the ICC might yield to demands for changes, Mr. Schmidt had taken a tough, take-it-or-leave-it stance throughout the process. 

   The strategy seemed particularly ill-chosen later when, in an effort to get the merger reconsidered, Mr. Schmidt himself began offering concessions. 
One that particularly upset Southern Pacific employees was a proposal to lease what some believed was the soul of the railroad: the line between Sacramento, Calif., and Ogden, Utah, which dates back to 1869. 

   Mr. Schmidt's concessions, which eventually covered thousands of miles of track, "gave away more than we would have liked," says Robert West, a Santa Fe director. 
After all the changes, it "wasn't the same merger it was and didn't have the same benefits," says Lester Kloss, a senior vice president of A.T. Kearney Inc., a consultant for both railroads. 

   The concessions brought other problems as well. 
While they helped Mr. Schmidt persuade the Union Pacific to support the merger, they angered the Burlington Northern, which switched from a neutral position to opposing the merger. 
Mr. Schmidt declined repeated requests from this newspaper for an interview on his role. 

   Opposition from competitors also contributed to the initial rejection of the merger, and that has angered Santa Fe executives. 
"What irritates me," says Mr. Reed, "is that we didn't oppose the Burlington Northern mergers. 
We were gentlemen about it. 
But now that they've got theirs, they don't want anyone else to have similar capabilities." 

   The deterioration of the railroads -- particularly the Southern Pacific - during this limbo period has led to a decline in employee morale. 
Engines have even been allowed to run out of fuel in mid-trip. 
"To a person, our employees are sick to death of the process. 
Sick of decisions not being made or being made in a convoluted fashion. 
Sick to death of this merger," says a mid-level manager at the Southern Pacific. 

   Competitors have been able to lure away business by exploiting the low morale and Mr. Schmidt's talk of a Southern Pacific bankruptcy -- "an unfortunate choice of words on his part," says Edward Ahern, Southern Pacific's vice president of administration. 
Overall, Union Pacific has benefited the most, scoring a major coup when it won a big contract to haul finished automobiles for a joint venture of Toyota and General Motors in Fremont, Calif. 

   As the case has worn on, the distractions at both railroads have become overpowering. 
The merger "drove us nuts," says Lawrence Cena, who retired as the Santa Fe railroad's president about a year ago. 
Among other things, it contributed to the Santa Fe's tardy entry into doublestack container trains, which carry ocean containers one above the other. 

   On the Friday before Easter, according to current and former managers of the two railroads, a group of outside Santa Fe directors, led by Mr. Biaggini, the former Southern Pacific chairman, began plotting the ouster of Mr. Schmidt. 
Although the two men had once been allies, Mr. Biaggini was angered shortly after his retirement when Mr. Schmidt took away his use of the company jet and forced him to vacate a large office with a panoramic view of San Francisco Bay for an office one-quarter the size with a view of a courtyard. 

   At a hastily called meeting, the board sided with Mr. Biaggini. 
Mr. Schmidt was given a consultant's contract, reportedly worth $5 million, and an out-of-the-way office. 
His predecessor, Mr. Reed, agreed to come out of retirement to temporarily lead the company. 
Mr. Biaggini declines to discuss his role in the board's affairs. 

   Now, Mr. Reed finds himself confronting the company's biggest challenge ever. 
If the ICC rules against the merger, he will have to decide whether the parent company should remain in the railroad business at all. 
"The most frustrating part is that the two companies have been in suspense for so many years," he says. 

   At the company's recent annual meeting, Mr. Reed, 70, told the audience that he had never dreamed he would return to the corporation. 
"I'm just an old lantern swinger," he said at one point. 
But later, when asked whether he thought the merger would ever succeed, he paused and looked perplexed. 
"With the way things have gone so far," he said, "I guess you couldn't be surprised by anything that might happen." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
