ID: 133	RANK: 14	SCORE: 17.667868
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871229-0037 </DOCNO>
<HL> Santa Fe to Sell Southern Pacific to Unit
Of Anschutz; Move Likely to Be Opposed
---
By Francine Schwadel and David J. Jefferson
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX HENG LABOR
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. agreed to sell its Southern Pacific railroad unit to Rio Grande Industries Inc. for $1.02 billion, but the proposal is likely to be vigorously contested in regulatory proceedings that could last a year or longer. 

   Two unsuccessful bidders -- Kansas City Southern Industries Inc. and the Railway Labor Executives' Association, which represents Southern Pacific employees -- said they oppose the proposed sale and will continue to pursue their bids. 
"The process has just begun," said Richard I. Kilroy, chairman of the railway association. 

   The proposed sale also drew criticism from Henley Group Inc., a La Jolla, Calif.-based company that holds a 14.7% stake in Sante Fe. 
Henley, which has hinted that it is considering a proxy battle or tender offer for Santa Fe, called the proposal "unwise," saying it "amounts to a bankruptcy auction." 

   Santa Fe decided to sell Southern Pacific after the Interstate Commerce Commission, citing anti-competitive concerns, ordered the Chicago-based company to shed one of the two railroad units that it has operated since 1983. 
But ICC approval also will be needed for the sale to Rio Grande, a railroad unit of Denver-based Anschutz Corp. 

   Malcolm Sterrett, one of five ICC commissioners, said the agency hopes to make a decision about the proposed sale "as soon as possible." 
He added, however, that the process could take a year or longer. 

   Santa Fe said proceeds from the proposed sale would be used in connection with a plan to pay Santa Fe shareholders at least $4 billion in a previously announced restructuring of the railroad and energy concern. 
That plan, which involves additional borrowings, is seen partly as an effort to leverage Santa Fe to make it less attractive to unwanted suitors. 

   Santa Fe said Rio Grande agreed to pay $1.02 billion in cash for Southern Pacific and to assume about $780 million in outstanding debt. 
Robert D. Krebs, Santa Fe's chief executive officer, said in a prepared statement that the proposed sale "is consistent with the public interest and is in the best interest of our shareholders." 

   However, Kansas City Southern said its offer, which wasn't disclosed, was "hundreds of millions of dollars higher in value" and faced "fewer regulatory problems." 
A spokeswoman for the Kansas City, Mo.-based railroad pointed out that, when the ICC ordered Santa Fe to divest one of its railroad units, the agency commented that merging the Southern Pacific with the Rio Grande would result in "a loss of railroad competition in the West." 
An ICC official said that didn't necessarily mean the commission would reject the proposed sale. 

   Meanwhile, the railway employees association, which had offered to match any bid, maintained that its proposal was "the most viable in satisfying the ICC's divestiture order and the concerns of employees covered by existing agreements." 

   In San Francisco, Denman K. McNear, chairman of Southern Pacific, which has operated under a trust for the last four years, said that management is "disappointed" that its efforts with the railway employees association to buy the railroad "were not favorably considered." 

   Henley, which has interests in manufacturing, engineering and real estate, reiterated its contention that a sale or spinoff of Santa Fe's "healthy" Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe railroad "would create significant value for shareholders and give the ailing Southern Pacific a chance to recover." 

   Michael D. Dingman, Henley's chairman and chief executive officer, declined to say what action his company might take in response to the proposed sale of the Southern Pacific. 
The executive called the transaction "a travesty" and said that the proposed sale price is "way under its substantial value." 
However, Mr. Dingman added that "with a company as big as Santa Fe there's still a lot of value there" even without Southern Pacific. 

   Mr. Dingman also said that he expects the transaction "to create a turmoil at the ICC." 

   A spokesman for Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., which holds an 8.2% stake in Santa Fe, said the Toronto-based real estate company didn't plan any immediate comment on the proposed sale. 

   Southern Pacific, formally known as the Southern Pacific Transportation Co., operates a 13,000-mile system stretching from Portland, Ore., to New Orleans with a route going from Texas to Kansas City, Mo., and St. Louis. 
The Denver &amp; Rio Grande Western Railroad unit of Rio Grande Industries is a 2,500-mile system between Utah and Kansas City, Mo. 

   The combination would create one of the five largest rail systems in the U.S., a 15,500-mile system serving 14 states. 
Samuel R. Freeman, vice president and general counsel for Rio Grande, maintained that it would be "an end-to-end merger" that would "restore the competitive balance" in the central U.S. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
