ID: 133	RANK: 22	SCORE: 16.835421
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870407-0147 </DOCNO>
<HL> Business World:
The Santa Fe Fears a Rail Regulatory Relapse
---
By George Melloan</HL>
<DD> 04/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   When John J. Schmidt in 1983 undertook to merge his Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway with the Southern Pacific Railroad he felt the two lines had a "manifest destiny" to become one. 
That's an old-fashioned expression applied to two railroads with a long and colorful history. 
The one laid track along the Santa Fe trail in Civil War days and the other, SP, was a key player in the post-Gold Rush development of California. 

   But alas, the Interstate Commerce Commission had other ideas. 
Overruling both the staff and chairman, four members of the commission voted last July 24 to deny the merger. 
They had been convinced by the Justice Department and other intervenors that the merger would be "anticompetitive." 
So Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. (SFSP), the already merged holding company, was forced to put Southern Pacific Railroad in trust and attempt to meet the ICC objections. 

   SFSP has since exchanged trackage rights with four competitors, most particularly the big Union Pacific. 
Now Mr. Schmidt, SFSP chairman and chief executive, is asking the ICC to reconsider. 

   "We're responding to what they found was necessary. 
To get the decision early is just vital. 
We've had the employees of both railroads hanging in limbo for over three and a half years; it's demoralizing to employees. 
If we have to unravel, there's going to be further dislocation of what the railroad structure is going to be like in the country and there'll be a fairly extended period of unsettled conditions. 
We thought we were pursuing what I call the manifest destiny of not only both railroads but of the merger scheme as conceived of under the National Transportation Policy. 

   "If we misconceived, what's going to happen and whom we sell one or both railroads to and how it will affect the national transportation system is a chapter that is unwritten yet. 
We know what our options are and they will be pursued, but we very, very much want this merger and we think it's good for enhancing rail competition among more viable competitors." 

   If the ICC's rejection came as a big surprise to Mr. Schmidt, he can perhaps be forgiven. 
When you look at a map of the U.S. rail system there is indeed a certain tidiness to the idea of having six major rail systems, three in the East and three in the West. 
Southern Pacific and Santa Fe Railway Co. (SPSF), the name planned for the railroad component of Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp., would represent the southern tier in the West. 
The Union Pacific would be the middle tier and the Burlington Northern the top tier. 
In the East the three main systems would be newly privatized Conrail, CSX and Norfolk Southern. 

   Years ago, there were hopes for a group of transcontinental railroads. 
But the main thrust since the rails were deregulated has been to try to revive the badly rundown system through cost cutting. 
And that is most quickly done by merging lines with parallel trackage and spinning off unprofitable branch lines to newly formed, and largely nonunion, short line companies. 

   Of course, that was exactly what the ICC ruled against in the SPSF case, which is why its decision was such a big surprise. 
Up until then, Washington had come a long way in enlightening itself on the costs of economic regulation. 
Indeed, the main reason the deregulatory Staggers Act passed in 1980 was that the railroads were in such sad shape. 
Federal Railway Administrator John Riley notes that at that time roads accounting for one-quarter of the national trackage were in bankruptcy, 48,000 miles of track were under "slow orders," meaning they weren't safe for normal speeds, and the roads were losing 20 million tons of volume a year. 
Since deregulation, the railroads have made a comeback, but earnings are by no means spectacular. 

   The ICC's SPSF ruling helped fan fears of a reactionary re-regulatory movement, but those fears now have diminished some. 
The economic cost would be huge. 

   It's instructive to note that the original SPSF application envisioned savings to the public and the railroads themselves of nearly $288 million a year. 
Mr. Schmidt now estimates he has given up $39 million to other carriers in trackage deals. 
But the total savings now would be $294 million. 
For example, SPSF would be able to use Union Pacific trackage from St. Louis to Chicago, saving itself a backhaul of 250 miles through Kansas City. 
That means "a lot, a lot of money." 

   But what about competition? 
The justification of regulation was that railroading was a "natural monopoly." 
That concept still gets much exercise in ICC hearings and congressional debates. 
It doesn't take a genius to see that trucks are a big competitor for railroads. 
Yet the ICC majority last year refused to consider trucks and based its decision solely on whether the SPSF merger would diminish rail-to-rail competition. 
There was an esoteric debate over whether trucks are competitive on hauls of over 1,000 miles, an issue Chairman Heather J. Gradison obviously found puzzling since the SPSF hauls a lot of freight less than 1,000 miles just as trucks do. 

   In fact, given the highly developed U.S. transportation infrastructure, few if any shippers are truly "captive" to rails. 
The best case is made by electric utilities that have power plants served by coal-hauling roads, but big utilities don't lack bargaining power. 
For one thing, the Staggers Act now allows long-term contracts between shippers and railroads. 
That, incredibly, was not allowed under the old law because Congress had once decided that volume discounts to big shippers were "unfair." 
In drawing up contracts, the relevant fact is that both the railroad and the utility need each other. 
Some utilities, particularly in the West, have surplus capacity, meaning they can switch to other sources if hauling costs at a single plant rise. 

   "I would love to get the same return on carrying coals to Newcastle that Newcastle gets, Newcastle being the utilities," says Mr. Schmidt. 
Utilities have a much higher return on capital than railroads, he says. 

   There also is broader competition. 
"If you don't move the traffic you don't get any money and if the guy you move it for doesn't make any money, you're not going to move it for long," Mr. Schmidt observes, quite plausibly. 
If the customer has competition, which he usually has, the railroad has competition, too. 

   Railroads have their own hang-ups, Mr. Schmidt says. 
"Rail attitudes have been terrible in the past because it was all regulation. 
You go to the commission and say my costs have gone up, and gee, the labor boys won again and you raise the rate and you raise the rate and you raise the rate and what is happening is that most of the traffic that had an option is going, going, gone to trucks and the pipelines. 
And then the people that couldn't go anywhere, they were trapped. 
Staggers came along to stop that ball game." 

   Clearly, things have been looking up in railroading and the transportation business in general. 
The trains are getting up to speed again. 
Systems are being rationalized and the competition is fierce among all modes of transportation, which can only mean very large savings for the public. 
Another turndown of the SPSF merger, which seems unlikely given the support it now has picked up from shippers and even competing roads, would be a disturbing reversal. 
But stranger things have happened in the wonderful world of transportation regulation. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
