ID: 133	RANK: 3	SCORE: 24.160372
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870701-0088 </DOCNO>
<HL> 
 </HL>
<SO>  </SO>
<IN> BNI KSU LABOR SFX
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The Interstate Commerce Commission, ending one of the longest-running sagas in modern railroad history, refused to reconsider its 1986 rejection of the proposed merger of the Southern Pacific and Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe railroads. 

   The 4-1 vote underscored the commission's continued strong concerns about the potentially anti-competitive nature of the merger, which would have produced the nation's third-largest railroad, with more than 25,000 miles of track in the West and Southwest. 

   The action will force Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp., the Chicago-based parent company of both railroads, to sell at least one of the railroads. 
The corporation was created in 1983 when Santa Fe Industries Inc. merged with Southern Pacific Co., and it has operated the two railroads separately while awaiting ICC approval. 
Last July, the commission rejected the merger. 

   The ICC, in refusing to review that decision yesterday, gave Santa Fe Southern Pacific 90 days to submit a divestiture plan. 
It is the first time in recent years that the commission ordered such a divestiture. 
The company will have up to two years to sell one of the railroads, according to commission staff members. 

   Santa Fe Southern Pacific's stock rose sharply yesterday, closing at $50, up $3.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 
It was the most actively traded issue on the exchange, with 4.9 million shares changing hands. 
In addition, Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. put the company's debt ratings under review and Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it will continue an existing review. 

   Railroad industry analysts say the collapse of the merger is likely to touch off a buying spree for portions of one or both of the railroads and could lead to creation of the nation's first coast-to-coast rail system if an Eastern railroad emerges as the buyer. 

   At a news conference immediately after the ICC vote, Landon Rowland, chief executive officer of Kansas City Southern Industries Inc., said his company would make an offer within the next 60 days to buy Southern Pacific. 
Hours later, Burlington Northern Railroad said it was "interested in acquiring segments of the Southern Pacific or the Santa Fe or both." 
In addition, some Southern Pacific managers and a rail union official separately raised the possibility of buyouts. 

   John Reed, chairman and chief executive of Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp., at the news conference expressed disappointment about the commission decision, but said the company wouldn't appeal it in court. 

   "Our employees have been held in suspense long enough," he said. 
"We just have to get on with our business." 
The company, he added, plans a major realignment involving a renewed focus on its "core businesses" of natural resources, petroleum and transportation, and the sale of a number of other subsidiaries. 

   Mr. Reed, in response to a question, denied that the company already has decided to sell Southern Pacific, which remains weaker than Santa Fe despite recent signs of improvement. 
"We haven't made any decision as to which railroad will be disposed of," he said. 
He added that it was "conceivable" both railroads would be sold, particularly if management failed to win more concessions from labor. 

   However, industry sources doubted that Mr. Reed, who headed the Santa Fe for 16 years, would agree easily to sell that railroad. 
And Richard Kilroy, chairman of the Railway Labor Executives Association, a group representing rail labor unions, dismissed his statement on labor concessions as "posturing." 

   Analysts estimate the value of the two railroads is as much as $3 billion. 

   The commission, in upholding its earlier rejection of the merger, overruled a staff recommendation to reopen the case. 
The staff argued that a review of the case was needed because of the numerous agreements over track rights that Santa Fe Southern Pacific made with other railroads to ameliorate competitive problems. 

   But the majority of the commissioners dismissed that argument. 
"I'm not convinced that the anti-competitive effects we identified in the initial decision have been adequately remedied," said Commissioner Malcolm Sterrett. 
Vice Chairman Paul Lamboley agreed: "I don't think there is really a change at all." 

   Some analysts believe that railroad mergers are a necessity for the railroad industry to survive, and that closing or substantially narrowing that option could cripple the industry's chances. 

   By contrast, the ICC's denial was greeted with enthusiasm at Southern Pacific. 
Many of the high-ranking executives there had given up support for the merger long ago. 
At a staff meeting to draft a news release on the commission's decision, one top manager jokingly crossed out the word "disappointed" and scribbled in "tickled" to describe Southern Pacific's reaction. 

   After several lean years, the Southern Pacific is showing some signs of rebirth, due in large part to a stabilized customer base and lower costs for fuel and labor. 
The company showed a profit in the first quarter, usually the quarter with the lowest railroad traffic of the year. 

   The railroad also recently completed a $1.3 billion track improvement program and opened a container transfer facility outside Los Angeles to handle the growing number of merchandise containers coming off ships. 

   Santa Fe Southern Pacific's Mr. Reed, in describing the company's plans for realignment, said the following subsidiaries would be offered for sale: Robert E. McKee, a general contractor; Bankers Leasing &amp; Financial Corp.; Santa Fe Pacific Timber Co.; Gulf Central Pipeline Co.; Chaparral Pipeline; and Black Mesa Pipeline. 

   The company, whose most valuable holdings are its $5 billion of real estate assets, also signaled that it is willing to sell some of its fully developed properties. 
These include the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles and the McDonnell Douglas Center in San Jose, Calif. 

   On the possible sale of either the Santa Fe or Southern Pacific railroads, the most intriguing possibility is that of the creation of a transcontinental rail carrier by an Eastern railroad bidder. 
The benefits of such a combination appear to be growing, reflecting the boom in coast-to-coast shipments of containerized imports from the Far East. 

   The big Eastern railroads, Norfolk Southern Corp., Consolidated Rail Corp. and CSX Corp., declined comment. 
But last May, Norfolk Southern Chairman Arnold McKinnon told analysts that "we'll look" if one of the Western railroads became available. 

   Creating a transcontinental rail system faces some problems. 
Some rail executives long have dismissed as minimal the potential cost savings and traffic gains from such combinations. 
In addition, the formation of a coast-to-coast railroad likely would spur competitors to make similar combinations, and those proposed combinations would face regulatory hurdles, including ICC review. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
