ID: 133	RANK: 41	SCORE: 14.979522
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870415-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
Santa Fe's Schmidt Won't Accept 'No'
---
By Judith Valente
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/15/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN>
<DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Companies that gripe about how long it takes to complete a merger should consider the plight of John J. Schmidt, chairman of Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. 
He's been trying to conclude the same transaction for four years. 

   His struggle is to merge the Atchison Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway with the Southern Pacific railroad, a move that would create the second-largest U.S. railroad. 
The transaction has been in limbo since 1983, pending antitrust clearance from the Interstate Commerce Commission. 

   Last summer, a strategical blunder by Mr. Schmidt nearly killed the merger. 
Afraid the ICC might require concessions to Santa Fe competitors, the executive insisted that the commission either approve the proposal intact or reject it. 
The ICC went along with those terms, and in a decision that stunned the industry, rejected the plan. 

   Mr. Schmidt has since regrouped with Santa Fe attorneys and asked the ICC to rehear the case -- this time with concessions already built in. 
He also has put together a huge list of endorsers of the merger, including customers, other railroads and city and state governments. 

   Although the commission has agreed to rethink its position and a decision is expected during the next four months, some industry observers have begun to question whether Mr. Schmidt's dogged persistence makes sense -- especially given the ICC's historic reluctance to reverse itself. 

   "There are two schools of thought about what he's doing," says Jeffrey Stone, a railroad analyst with Wertheim &amp; Co. in New York. 
"There are those who think he's being very pragmatic and practical and doing something right for the company, but very difficult. 
There's another school of thought that says he's a Don Quixote." 

   Mr. Schmidt was so confident of ICC approval that on the day the agency met, he scheduled a lunch meeting with analysts to discuss the presumed victory. 
Santa Fe officials had to cancel the session hastily. 

   Santa Fe's board still supports the merger, though not without some doubts, says director Robert H. West, president of Butler Manufacturing Inc. "We've given away more than we would like to (in concessions to other railroads). 
Whether it's too much will be measured retrospectively," Mr. West said. 

   Mr. Schmidt insists the concessions the company has made as part of its latest proposal actually may result in a better transaction. 
He says the plan would cut costs at the combined railroad by $300 million annually, slightly more than originally forecast. 

   The concessions mainly involve settlements with other railroads that opposed the merger. 
They allow the other carriers to use certain stretches of Santa Fe or Southern Pacific track, in return for reciprocal arrangements or other considerations. 
In return, the competitors have agreed to support the merger. 

   "I think Santa Fe has done as well as it could under the circumstances and probably better than most anyone could have expected," said Samuel Freeman, vice president and general counsel of Denver &amp; Rio Grande Western Railroad. 

   Unlike his predecessor John Reed, a railroad buff who moved up the ranks from track maintenance supervisor to chairman, Mr. Schmidt, 59 years old, started out as a company lawyer and has been more active in legal associations than railroad groups. 

   Those who have worked with him say he exhibits a lawyer's attention to detail, sometimes pointing out even the slightest discrepancies in a report. 
In staff discussions, he also often brings up his responsibility to shareholders. 

   With the same dogged determination he has shown in the merger battle, he took up long-distance running 20 years ago, when he was "fat, sloppy and couldn't even run two blocks" and two friends his age had already died of heart attacks, he says. 
He eats carrots, apples and oranges for lunch and runs 15 miles a week, often along the lake front here. 

   Santa Fe Southern Pacific has earned money during most of his five-year tenure, but posted a net loss of $137.9 million for 1986, compared with net income of $469.6 million a year earlier. 
Mr. Schmidt blamed the deficit mainly on the collapse of oil prices that affected Santa Fe's petroleum operations. 

   The Santa Fe railroad posted an operating loss of $142 million for 1986; Southern Pacific had an operating loss of $586.9 million. 
Company officials say the losses were high because of certain restructuring costs and special charges. 

   If the ICC again rejects the merger, Santa Fe will be forced to sell at least one of its railroads. 
While the Southern Pacific is already owned by the company, it has been held in a separate trust and operated independently since 1983 pending a final ICC decision. 

   Investment advisers who work for Santa Fe shareholders said they believe that a negative decision would benefit the company's stockholders, because the company would realize a short-term infusion of funds from the sale of one of its carriers. 
The advisers maintain, however, that the Santa Fe would gain more long-term benefits if the merger were approved. 

   Mr. Schmidt won't say what he will do if the ICC again rejects the case. 
Harking back to his childhood in a tough neighborhood in downtown Chicago, he says: "I'm used to winning, and I'm used to losing. 
When I lose, I get up and keep trying." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
