ID: 133	RANK: 50	SCORE: 13.959914
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870417-0160 </DOCNO>
<HL> 

Why Rail Merger Was Sidetracked</HL>
<DD> 04/17/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN>
<TEXT>
   In "The Santa Fe Fears a Rail Regulatory Relapse" (Business World, April 7), George Melloan argues that a second rejection by the ICC of a merger between the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific railroads would be a disturbing reversal of deregulation. 
Mr. Melloan mischaracterizes both the reduction in rail regulation that has occurred since the passage of the Staggers Act of 1980 and the ICC's competitive analysis of the proposed merger. 

   The Staggers Act did not deregulate the railroads. 
It did free them from a great deal of regulation, where sufficient competition exists, but it also left in place a variety of regulations designed to "balance the needs of carriers, shippers and the public." 
Perhaps the most important remains the ICC's responsibility to establish maximum reasonable rail rates for movements not subject to effective competition. 

   This places a heavy burden on the ICC to protect competition where it exists. 
The ICC rejected the SF-SP merger because it would have significantly reduced transportation competition and, as a result, would have increased the need to regulate rail rates. 

   Mr. Melloan argues that few if any shippers are truly captive to railroads because many shippers can choose between rail and highway. 
There are, however, a significant number of shippers that cannot economically use trucks. 
Mr. Melloan incorrectly characterizes as "esoteric" the debate before the ICC over whether trucks are competitive on hauls of more than 1,000 miles. 
Generally, a lessening of railroad competition on these longer hauls cannot be attenuated by competition from trucks. 
The ICC's decision to reject the merger was based on a determination, in which the Justice Department concurred, that the merger would reduce overall transportation competition, not just rail competition, for a significant amount of traffic. 

   Mr. Melloan also mischaracterizes the role of mergers in reviving the badly rundown rail system that existed at the time the Staggers Act was passed. 
The reductions in costs that have been achieved in the past six years have principally resulted from non-merger provisions in the Staggers Act that allow the abandonment of unprofitable lines, the formation of nonunion short-line railroads, the tailoring of rates and service through contracts, and the rationalization of the rate structure. 
Whether these cost savings can best be realized through mergers is problematic since there has been no railroad merger between close horizontal competitors since well before the passage of the act. 
In general, a large percentage of predicted efficiencies from railroad mergers have failed to materialize. 
More specifically, the efficiency estimates by the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific are riddled with errors and misconceptions. 
When a merger reduces competition, its approval requires a careful and accurate showing of efficiencies that could not be achieved without the merger. 
The applicants in this case simply did not provide the necessary showing. 

   Contrary to Mr. Melloan's assertion, the ICC's decision to reject the merger does not represent a slide toward re-regulation. 
Rather, by protecting existing competition, the decision has helped prevent such a slide. 

   Barry C. Harris
   Senior Economist, Economists Inc.
   Washington
   ---
   The writer served as chief of rail cost and pricing policy at the ICC during 1980-81 and testified on behalf of the Justice Department in the SF-SP proceeding. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
