ID: 133	RANK: 52	SCORE: 13.768079
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870421-0048 </DOCNO>
<HL> Schmidt Resigns
As Santa Fe's
Chairman, Chief
---
Ex-Chief Reed Will Assume
Top Posts Temporarily
At Railroad Company
---
By Judith Valente
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX WNEWS
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. said John J. Schmidt resigned as chairman and chief executive officer, and that he will be temporarily succeeded by John S. Reed, who retired from the company's top posts in 1983. 

   The unexpected resignation of Mr. Schmidt, 59 years old, stunned many in the industry. 
There were indications that it followed an unscheduled meeting of Santa Fe's directors. 
According to some sources, such a meeting was called for Sunday by Alan C. Furth, vice chairman of Santa Fe and president of its Southern Pacific unit. 
The meeting was said to have lasted late into the evening. 

   Mr. Schmidt's departure comes amid the company's continuing effort to create the nation's second-largest railroad by merging its two railroad units, the Atchison Topeka &amp; Santa Fe and the Southern Pacific. 
The Southern Pacific currently is held in trust, pending a final decision on the merger by the Interstate Commerce Commission. 

   It wasn't immediately clear whether Mr. Schmidt's resignation was connected with the company's often frustrating struggle to merge the carriers. 
In a brief statement, the company said only that Mr. Schmidt will pursue other interests "of a consulting and entrepreneurial nature." 
Mr. Schmidt couldn't be reached for comment. 

   There was some speculation that Mr. Schmidt may have become something of a liability in his dogged pursuit of the merger. 
His original tough stand before the ICC -- insisting that it approve the merger without conditions -- backfired when the commission rejected the company's proposal last year. 

   Mr. Schmidt had since regrouped with company attorneys and presented a new case. 
But directors may have decided that a softer touch will be necessary to win ICC approval, some in the industry suggested. 
In turning to the Mr. Reed, 69 years old, directors are placing their faith in a widely respected and longtime industry executive. 

   "Somebody had to be the fall guy for the way the merger had been going," one transportation analyst said. 

   John S. Runnells II, a member of the Santa Fe board, said the company's directors remain committed to the merger, but declined to comment further. 
The ICC recently scheduled oral arguments for May 14 on whether it should reopen the case. 

   Mr. Reed, who began his career at Santa Fe in 1939, first proposed in 1980 the merger of the two railroads, which serve extensive parts of the West and Southwest, but could reach no agreement at the time with his longtime rival, Benjamin Biaggini, then-chairman of the Southern Pacific Co. 

   In a statement to employees of the railroad, Mr. Reed said: "It will be my first priority to see that we move forward to implement the strategies of the company." 

   Mr. Reed is credited with building the Santa Fe into one of the nation's most important cargo-carrying railroads. 
A Yale University graduate, he started his career at the railroad as a track-testing assistant and worked his way up the management ranks from train master to chairman. 
He helped promote the practice of "piggybacking," using truck trailers on flat cars, a method currently common in the industry. 

   Colleagues say his management style contrasts sharply with that of Mr. Schmidt, a quick-tempered, strong-willed man who sometimes came into conflict with his top managers. 
In recent months, a series of department heads left the company, including the director of human resources. 
According to one company official, the director was locked out of his office at Mr. Schmidt's behest. 

   "John Reed could also rule with an iron hand. 
But when you walked into his office, he put his arm around you; and when you left, he walked you downstairs and put you in a cab and made sure you had a candy bar," said Steven Lewins, a transporation analyst for New York-based Citibank. 

   Mr. Schmidt's resignation apparently took even upper management at the company by surprise. 
Employees were called into a conference room at 9 a.m. CDT yesterday and told of the departure, one official close to the company said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
