ID: 133	RANK: 58	SCORE: 13.303819
<DOC>
<DOCNO>
WSJ910418-0115
</DOCNO>
<DOCID>
910418-0115.
</DOCID>
<HL>
   Nationwide Strike Blocks Rail Freight
   And Shuts Down Some Passenger Lines
   ----
   By Daniel Machalaba
   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
</HL>
<DATE>
04/18/91
</DATE>
<SO>
WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2
</SO>
<CO>
   C CHV DD F GM JBHT TIN TOYOY
</CO>
<MS>
BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)
CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)
ENERGY (ENE)
INDUSTRIAL (IDU)
UTILITIES (UTI)
</MS>
<IN>
AUTOMOBILES (AUT)
CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)
CONTAINERS &amp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)
ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)
OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)
PETROLEUM (PET)
RAILROADS (RAI)
MASS TRANSIT, BUS LINES, SUBWAYS, HIGHWAYS (TRA)
COMMERCIAL TRUCKING AND RELATED WAREHOUSING (TRK)
</IN>
<RE>
ARKANSAS (AR)
CALIFORNIA (CA)
DELAWARE (DE)
JAPAN (JA)
MICHIGAN (MI)
TEXAS (TX)
</RE>
<LP>
   Freight railroads suspended operations after unions
launched a nationwide strike against them, stopping transport
of everything from coal to cars and shutting some commuter
and intercity passenger lines.
   The carriers said cutbacks in their management ranks
prevented them from trying to maintain limited service with
supervisory personnel. "We simply don't have the number of
supervisors to run the trains," said Michael Walsh, chairman
of Union Pacific Corp.'s rail unit.
</LP>
<TEXT>
   But labor leaders said the railroads' decision prompted
Congress to act quickly to settle the strike and adopt
recommendations made by a presidential board in January. The
board's recommendations for changes in wages, health benefits
and work rules are more popular with management, while rail
unions call the changes damaging.
   Shippers generally said their pre-strike preparations for
alternate transport would protect them if the rail shutdown
doesn't last more than a few days. Electric utilities said
they could weather a long rail strike, because their coal
stockpiles are at unusually high levels. But automobile
makers said they already had to curtail some operations
because of a shortage of parts that normally arrive by rail.
   Commuter trains in New York and Chicago ran regular
schedules yesterday, but a San Francisco commuter line was
shut down, affecting about 4,300 riders. Amtrak reported
extensive disruption of its long-distance passenger trains,
which operate over the tracks of the freight railroads. But
its Boston-Washington Northeast Corridor and a few other busy
lines operated without interruption.
   A spokeswoman for General Motors Corp. said the company's
assembly plants operated normally yesterday. But she said the
company expects the rail strike to affect 70% to 80% of its
assembly plants within the next 24 hours and all its assembly
plants by the end of the week. That could lead to reduced
work shifts or shutdowns, she said. Most of the items GM
ships by rail are heavy parts and materials that would be too
difficult or costly to switch to trucks.
   Ford Motor Co. said all but one of its 14 U.S. auto
assembly plants weathered the first day of the rail strike
without serious problems. But its Chicago plant, which builds
Ford Taurus and Mercury Sable cars, cut output about 50%,
reflecting a shortage of parts and a lack of storage space
where it could have built inventories. "It would be
logistically impossible to divert all inbound rail shipments
to truck," said Bill Anderson, a transportation manager at
Ford. He added that the strike's effects would become "acute"
at other Ford plants by the end of the week.
   "If it lasts only two or three days, the rail strike won't
disrupt much," said James Bartley, president of the National
Industrial Transportation League, a shipper group in
Washington. "But if it extends beyond that, the strike would
really start to cripple the nation's supply line."
   Chevron Corp.'s Chevron U.S.A. unit said that if the
strike lasts more than six days, its chemical and oil
operations face some closings. Meanwhile, the company's
contingency plans are working. It turned to trucks for some
shipments, and it brought extra rail cars into its facilities
before the strike to store raw materials and finished goods
temporarily.
   But Marty Javinsky, manager of transportation planning and
services at San Francisco-based Chevron U.S.A., said, "Beyond
six days, it really gets dicey. We could see significant
shutdowns," particularly at its inland refineries that don't
have access to alternate waterborne transportation.
   California Steel Industries Inc., a closely held Fontana,
Calif., company, is counting on a quick end to the strike. It
needs to move at least 20,000 tons of steel-slab imports from
the docks in Long Beach, Calif., to Fontana by tonight. The
company hasn't lined up any trucks to move it at $3 a ton
more than rail costs, partly because it expects Congress to
end the strike. California Steel hasn't stockpiled slabs,
which it uses to make steel sheets for Los Angeles-area
customers.
   Du Pont Co., Wilmington, Del., said it has been building
inventories of raw materials in anticipation of a strike. The
company uses rail mainly for intra-company transport from one
manufacturing operation to another. "We can take a little bit
of disruption, but if the rail strike goes longer than a few
days we would get into serious difficulty," said Clifford
Sayre, vice president, Du Pont materials, logistics and
services.
   Du Pont's Consolidation Coal Co. unit is scrambling to
find storage space for the coal it isn't able to ship by
rail. It is already storing coal in concrete silos or in
stockpiles on the ground because of weak demand from
utilities. "At some mines in our system, it won't be more
than a day or two before we'll have to look at a cutback or
shutdown," said Thomas F. Hoffman, a vice president of
Consolidation Coal.
   Some shippers have taken aggressive measures to get
through the strike. Inland Container Corp., a unit of
Temple-Inland Corp., leased a railroad locomotive at its
largest paper-making facility so it can move boxcars on and
off its rail siding as needed. As a result, the company will
be able to load products onto cars that will be ready to go
when the strike ends.
   Asian shippers are adjusting their plans to avoid delays
caused by the strike.
   Toyota Motor Co. is switching some loads to truck. As much
as 60% of Toyota's exports to the U.S. from Japan normally
are unloaded at West Coast ports and put on trains for the
rest of their journey.
   Robert Larson, director of Kmart Taiwan Ltd., said he has
been instructed to use those ship lines that sail directly to
East Coast ports rather than those that get cargo there
through a combination of ship and rail. Fortunately, the rail
strike comes at a good time for apparel shippers, he said.
They have completed their export shipping for the summer
season and won't begin exporting for Christmas until next
month.
   The strike is giving a boost to railroads' chief
competitors, truckers. "We're ecstatic," said Paul Bergant,
executive vice president, marketing, of J.B. Hunt Transport
Services Inc., a Lowell, Ark., trucker. Mr. Bergant said that
J.B. Hunt has picked up additional shipments of paper, auto
parts and building materials that normally move on the rails.
As a result, the company now is running at 100% of capacity,
up from 90% before the strike.
</TEXT>
</DOC>
