ID: 133	RANK: 62	SCORE: 13.184630
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870408-0029 </DOCNO>
<HL> Who's News:
At CSX, Snow Gets His Show on the Road
---
By Richard Koenig
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 04/08/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CSX
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<TEXT>
   "My job," says John W. Snow, the new president and chief executive officer of CSX Corp.'s transportation group, "is to keep peace in the family." 

   It's a fast-growing family. 

   CSX, born in the 1980 merger of two regional railroad companies, aspires to become a global supermarket for shippers. 
In addition to railroads, the Richmond, Va.-based company now owns a barge line, a trucking concern and a fleet of ocean-going cargo ships. 
The strategy is to provide one-stop shipping: Rather than play one transportation company off against another, shippers would ask CSX to meet all their needs. 

   For example, a bottle of whiskey from Britain might travel on a CSX ship to a port in the U.S., there to be put on a CSX train and taken to a transfer terminal, where a CSX truck would pick up the shipment for the rest of its trip to, say, Chicago. 

   But as Mr. Snow acknowledges, "We're not all the way there yet. 
One-stop shipping is still a concept we're working on." 

   In his new position, which he assumed in January, Mr. Snow takes responsibility for much of the execution of this strategy. 
His performance will be watched closely by people in the industry who remain skeptical that bringing so many forms of transportation under common ownership actually can improve service. 

   "If you just tie rocks together to see whether they'll float, they won't," says Robert V. Delaney, a Cleveland-based transportation consultant. 
James M. Voytko, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc., observes that either CSX's course is "fraught with risk, or CSX has a lesson to teach the rest of the industry." 

   Other companies with a history in railroading also are vying for hauls that connect various forms of transportation. 
Instead of acquisitions, though, they often rely on agreements that allow them to offer package deals to shippers. 
And although some companies have made big acquisitions outside their traditional business, such as Norfolk Southern Corp.'s purchase of North American Van Lines, no U.S. transportation firm owns as wide an array of freight carriage as CSX does. 

   Mr. Snow, 47 years old, joined Chessie System Inc. in 1977, after holding several transportation-related positions in the federal government. 
A merger between Chessie System and Seaboard Coast Line Industries Inc. then created CSX. Mr. Snow quickly moved through several corporate positions and headed a rail unit before taking his latest job -- running by far the largest business group in CSX. 

   A lawyer and an economist, he "can understand an extremely convoluted analytic argument while having a good grasp of reality and pertinence," says William J. Baumol, an economist at Princeton and New York universities who has worked as a consultant to CSX. 

   In recent years, Mr. Snow had the important job of lobbying against the proposed merger of Norfolk Southern, CSX's archrival, with Consolidated Rail Corp., then controlled by the federal government. 
He had plenty of allies, and Conrail since has been sold to the public. 
Edward T. Breathitt Jr., a senior vice president at Norfolk Southern's Washington office, says Mr. Snow fought the merger vehemently but fairly. 
He says Mr. Snow is still a friend and a golfing companion. 

   Mr. Snow's group, which includes three rail units, the American Commercial Lines Inc. barge company and the trucking operations, accounted for about 75% of the 1986 revenue for the transportation and natural resources concern. 

   In his current post, a new one at CSX, Mr. Snow presides over rail operations involving 22,000 route miles throughout the eastern U.S. as well as freight carried on the backs of 8,000 truck-trailers. 
He must arbitrate questions about how the various transportation modes, which historically have been rivals, should mesh. 
Indeed, CSX even proposes to contract out parts of its business to companies it doesn't own if they promise the best service or the lowest rates -- in effect, to act as a transportation broker if that is what it takes to keep customers happy with one-stop shipping. 

   One pressing job involves CSX's newest service, a cargo-ship line called Sea-Land Corp. that was acquired last year for $800 million. (Sea-Land's trucking operations are being held in a trust pending an antitrust review by the Interstate Commerce Commission.) 
CSX expects that Sea-Land will help its piggyback business, in which cargo containers are moved directly among ships, rail cars and truck trailers. 
To whom Sea-Land will report hasn't been decided, but the transportation group has begun work on coordinating its information systems with Sea-Land's. 

   The acquisition should prevent some redundant costs. 
Sea-Land, based in Menlo Park, N.J., once planned to build a terminal in Chicago; now it won't have to since CSX already has such a facility there. 
And it is conceivable, Mr. Snow says, that Sea-Land will stop calling at certain ports if CSX trains can reach the same areas at lower cost. 

   But with the Sea-Land acquisition came higher debt, which in the first quarter contributed to an earnings decline at CSX. Net income dropped 14% to $73 million, or 47 cents a share, on revenue of $1.9 billion. 

   Some other railroad companies argue that they don't need to buy a shipping line to improve their ties with shipping companies. 
Union Pacific Corp., for instance, has a 10-year contract with American President Cos., which ships containers across the Pacific. 
Union Pacific picks up the containers at West Coast ports and moves them eastward; it then has help from American President's freight brokerage in filling the containers on the return trip. 

   Yet Mr. Snow argues there is evidence that CSX's marketing strategy, which he concedes is a "great experiment," will work. 
In 1982, the year before CSX acquired its American Commercial Lines barge line, 2% of American Commercial's tonnage was being transferred to CSX railroads. 
By last year, the transfers had increased to 5%, on a larger base. 

   Mr. Snow says the CSX-American Commercial combination has helped to change an "atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust" that had undermined efforts to make railroad-to-barge connections. 
"When each side wants 51% of a transaction," he says, "the transaction doesn't occur." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
