ID: 133	RANK: 8	SCORE: 18.656124
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890728-0154 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890728 </DD>
<AN> 890728-0154. </AN>
<HL> Industry Focus:
@  Trains Double Up to Get Truck Business
@  ---
@  New Car Setup Starts
@  Rate War, Aiding Shippers
@  ----
@  By Daniel Machalaba
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 07/28/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The proliferation of double-stack container trains is igniting a rate war between truckers and railroads, benefiting shippers with lower freight rates. 

   More than 100 double-stack trains, which carry one container loaded above another, now ply the nation's long-haul east-west freight routes each week, compared with a handful five years ago. 
Double-stack rates between Chicago and Los Angeles dropped 15% in the past 12 months, as freight-hauling capacity continued to grow amid a slowdown in demand. 
Some analysts expect rates to fall further when additional trains are launched. 

   The transcontinental freight routes have become "extremely competitive," says John Koons, president of Country Wide Transport Services Inc., a truck company. 
Double-stack trains are "taking a lot of freight that used to be routed via trucks." 

   More broadly, the double-stack trains are "increasing the efficiency of U.S. freight transportation and the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturers," says Gerard McCullough, deputy director of transportation studies at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

   The rate cutting affects long-distance east-west freight flows of more than $10 billion a year. 
Some analysts estimate that the industrywide rate drops spurred by double-stack competition are saving U.S. consumers between $500 million and $1 billion a year. 

   Among the biggest rate cuts are ones on the busy Chicago-Los Angeles corridor, where rates for some carriers plunged from about $1,500 for some of the bigger containers two years ago to $1,200 to $1,000 now. 

   Proctor &amp; Gamble Co. recently shifted some of its business away from trucks to double-stack trains because of the rate cuts and improvements in double-stack service. 
The company now ships 20 container loads a week of potato chips, peanut butter and liquid detergent from its Midwest plants to the West Coast by rail. 
In response to shipper defections, some truckers are slashing rates. 
Others are courting shippers further away from the major double-stack terminals. 
A few are fleeing transcontinental routes, focusing instead on shorter regional deliveries. 

   Country Wide is moving its headquarters from Pomona, Calif., where double-stack competition is keen, to Knoxville, Tenn. 
MNX Inc., a St. Joseph, Mo., trucker, is redeploying trucks to less competitive routes in the Southeast. 
Recently, MNX bought a shipping broker to gain access to the fast-growing double-stack market. 
Another trucker, CRST Inc., Cedar Rapids, Iowa, shelved plans to buy 50 more trucks, blaming rate declines. 

   "We're barely making money," says John Smith, president of CRST. 
"We're doing everything we can to keep costs down." 

   For decades the nation's railroads seemed helpless against trucking companies that siphoned off their most lucrative freight, leaving the rails with low-rated bulk traffic. 
They fought back with piggyback -- transporting highway trailers on flatcars -- but managed to win freight mainly from their own boxcars. 

   Double-stacks represent the "first concrete example of a new rail intermodal technology taking traffic off the highway," says Lee Lane, intermodal executive director of the Association of American Railroads. 
By some estimates, double-stacks are capturing U.S. freight shipments of more than $100 million a year from trucks. 

   By stacking two containers on special rail cars, railroads nearly double train capacity and cut rail costs 25%. 
The double-stack trains carry containers in low-slung, bathtub-shaped wells that provide a smoother ride than piggyback trains. 

   American President Cos., an Oakland, Calif.-based ocean ship line, launched the first coast-to-coast double-stack train in 1984. 
It was originally designed to speed international cargo off the company's ships on the West Coast to inland destinations. 
But to balance the heavy flow of Asian imports on its eastbound trains, the company solicited domestic freight to fill containers that would have returned empty to the West Coast. 
Later, American President expanded its trains to carry domestic freight in both directions. 

   "Our international freight volumes gave us the base to create a domestic freight system," says Donald Orris, president of the company's domestic freight unit. 

   Other ship lines, and the rail units of CSX Corp., Burlington Northern Inc. and Santa Fe Pacific Corp., have launched their own double-stack trains. 
Now they are trying to lure U.S. domestic shippers to use the the trains by ordering thousands of large-capacity containers, expanding terminals, speeding up train schedules and reducing rates. 
Currently, domestic freight accounts for about 30% of the cargo on double-stack trains and the business is growing rapidly. 

   CSX and American President have begun to dispatch their own company trucks and drivers, rather than relying on independent drivers, to move containers between shippers' loading docks and their railheads. 
That will eliminate some shipment delays, they say. 
And American President is refunding freight charges when it fails to deliver on time. 

   Double-stack operators are also making organizational changes, hiring executives from the trucking industry, for example. 
"The rails have finally realized after trial and error that to be competitive with truckers you have to think and act like a trucker," says M. McNeil Porter, a former trucking company executive who is president of CSX's CSL Intermodal unit. 

   Some shippers aren't likely to shift freight to double-stack trains any time soon. 
"Motor carriers cover more routes, give better service and their transit time is less," says Peter Brock, transportation manager of J.C. Penney Co. 
The trains are restricted, particularly in the East, by bridge and tunnel clearances. 
And shipper surveys rate trucks higher than rail intermodal service in reliability, speed, door-to-door delivery and customer responsiveness. 

   But 3M Corp., Campbell Soup Co. and General Electric Co.'s appliance division have recently switched some shipments to double-stack trains from trucks. 
One reason Procter &amp; Gamble switched some of its freight to trains from trucks is that "they use less fuel and create less pollution and that's good for the country," says Fred Morris, the company's transportation director. 

   Nabisco Foods Co. also plans to divert certain shipments to double-stacks because the company is concerned about the growing shortage of long-haul truck drivers. 
"We're trying to protect ourselves by putting as much freight on rail as we can," says William Ditoro, transportation director of the RJR Nabisco Inc. unit. 
"We're trying to wean ourselves off trucks." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
