ID: 133	RANK: 84	SCORE: 12.294382
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871012-0117 </DOCNO>
<HL> Delaware Otsego Refuses to Be Shunted by Conrail
---
Monopoly-Breaking Road to Port
Of New York Has Rough Stretches
---
By Daniel Machalaba
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 10/12/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DOCP
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN>
<TEXT>
   For a man who runs only 550 miles of tracks and used to live in a railroad car, Walter Rich gets a lot of attention. 

   Mr. Rich is president and chief executive officer of Delaware Otsego Corp., parent of the New York, Susquehanna &amp; Western Railway, which operates only in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. 
Still, a steady stream of executives from major railroads and ocean shipping companies, not to mention congressmen, winds to his upstate New York office to talk to the man who has "changed the railroad landscape," according to John Snow, president of CSX Corp.'s Transportation Inc. unit. 

   Mr. Rich did this by giving Consolidated Rail Corp. -- Conrail -- a run for its money. 
Two years ago, he turned a track-sharing agreement with Conrail into a competitive freight-hauling route. 
Thus positioned, Delaware Otsego's railroad became the eastern link for five weekly, coast-to-coast container trains. 
Now, in alliances with other Conrail competitors, Mr. Rich plans to add more trains. 

   Conrail was plainly startled to find that Mr. Rich's little road, which currently handles only 3% of the rail container shipments in the New York market, had broken its monopoly in the Port of New York. 
Conrail now has come to respect Delaware Otsego as a competitor. 

   He is a competitor with panache. 
A bachelor, Mr. Rich made his home for three years in a railroad car that had belonged to the president of the Erie-Lackawanna Railway, a Conrail predecessor. 
Now he lives in a suite at company headquarters, a sprawling early-19th-century lakeside mansion in Cooperstown, N.Y., where he sets his table with antique Pennsylvania Railroad dining-car silverware. 

   Heavyset, short and 41 years old, Mr. Rich plays down an image as a modern-day entrepreneur breathing competitive life into the U.S. rail system by profitably stitching disused trackage together. 
"I'm just a pragmatist looking for opportunity," he demurs. 
Of his rivalry with Conrail, he adds: "We're like a fly on the back of an elephant." 
Nevertheless, he shares the estimate of several railroad executives "that within five years we will be very important." 
With 17% of the stock, he is the largest shareholder of Delaware Otsego. 

   Rail shippers say the price of goods would drop if they had alternatives to monopoly carriers like Conrail. 
But railroads say more rail competition isn't necessary as long as vigorous truck competition keeps them honest. 

   Conrail has fought other challenges to its hold on the New York-area rail market, which generated about $1 billion, or one-third, of its revenue last year. 
Several years ago, Pittsburgh &amp; Lake Erie Railroad Co., for example, unsuccessfully lobbied federal agencies in an attempt to acquire rights to a Conrail line to New York, a move that Conrail fiercely opposed. (Ironically, Mr. Rich supported Conrail on that.) 

   A scrappy lawyer, Mr. Rich has cultivated wide political contacts and an extensive knowledge of what he calls "railroad history, finances and corporate struggles." 

   He began reaping his windfall when the 2.5-mile tourist railroad he bought near Cooperstown in 1966 later was condemned for a highway. 
He used the proceeds to buy local freight lines, which he revived by cutting labor and other costs and boosting service. 
He brought that attitude to Delaware Otsego, which he says has 50% lower labor costs than Conrail because it operates with smaller crews and without Conrail's costly work rules. 

   Mr. Rich's big break came in 1982. 
After buying rail lines in New Jersey and upstate New York, he convinced Conrail that year to grant him rights to haul freight trains on a Conrail track between Binghamton, N.Y., and northern New Jersey to connect his scattered rail properties. 

   The rights proved valuable. 
In 1985, Sea-Land Corp. launched double-stack trains, which carry containers one above another, to New York from West Coast ports. 
When Sea-Land, a container ship company CSX bought last year, failed to reach agreement with Conrail on price and terminals, the company turned to Mr. Rich. 
The Delaware Otsego began to haul the trains on the eastern leg of their cross-country journey -- using Conrail track. 

   Mr. Rich "took advantage of his local freight agreement to bust Conrail's monopoly," chortles Jim Boyd, editor of Railfan, a magazine for rail buffs. 
Mr. Rich acknowledges, "Conrail may not have anticipated the amount of business we'd get." 

   Last year, Conrail responded by canceling its haulage agreement with Mr. Rich. 
Balking at sharply higher fees to Conrail, he decided to renovate his own decrepit 70-mile stretch of hilly, curvy track through northern New Jersey and reroute trains onto the alternate route -- at a cost so far of $10 million, 50% more than expected, and the repairs aren't finished yet. 
Several trains have derailed on the track, blocking the line for days. 

   It was a typically audacious move, and not everyone thinks it was sound. 
The route is "preposterous from every angle," says Dennis Yachechak, a railroad consultant in Paramus, N.J. 
"He's running trains on a Burma Road. 
The route is long, slow, has stiff gradients, no signals and numerous grade crossings." 
Mr. Rich continues to use Conrail lines for most of the trip. 

   While getting his own rail link into shape, Mr. Rich also must battle Conrail's considerable advantage in its direct, shorter and faster route into the New York market from Chicago. 
In contrast, Sea-Land trains wend a circuitous journey from Chicago over track operated by CSX, Guilford Transportation Industries Inc. and Delaware Otsego. 
"We have much better service," says Charles Marshall, Conrail's senior vice president for marketing and sales, deriding his competition's "bargain-basement route." 

   Such criticism doesn't bother Mr. Rich. 
"Our quality is going to get better," he says. 
Then, "if we are cheaper than Conrail, that's not bad." 

   Conrail has thrown up roadblocks. 
At Binghamton, Conrail forces Sea-Land trains to switch onto a siding to make the connection between Delaware Otsego and Guilford. 
The maneuver wastes hours, and last week it led to a derailment involving cars carrying hazardous materials and forcing people to leave their homes. 

   Some railroad executives are frankly surprised that Mr. Rich, the son of an upstate New York dairy farmer, has gone as far as he has. 
"Early on I thought it was just a rail fan playing choo-choo," says Walter Travis, president of Bangor &amp; Aroostook Railroad in Bangor, Maine. 

   But many have now become believers. 
Indeed, one unabashed fan, Sen. David Durenberger (R., Minn.), sees in Mr. Rich the "same frontier spirit" as the great 19th-century railroad builders. 

   To keep growing, Mr. Rich has had to reach beyond the resources of the Delaware Otsego, which last year reported net income of $2.6 million on revenue of $19.1 million. 
He's been adept at attracting grants and low-interest loans from state and federal agencies interested in preserving rail service. 
Actually, the Delaware Otsego has an easier time getting bank financing than some regional railroads because it has lines in fast-growing northern New Jersey. 
"Railroads that have property in Podunk have trouble raising money," says Mr. Rich. 
"We have tremendous underlying real estate value to use as collateral." 

   The Delaware Otsego also got help from connecting railroads eager to find a non-Conrail route to New York. 
When Mr. Rich fixed his track through New Jersey, CSX sent technical advisers and donated 110,000 wooden ties, and Guilford supplied steel sections from a bridge it had abandoned in Pennsylvania. 
Norfolk Southern Corp., which didn't provide any help, now is interested in hauling freight over the line to the New York market. 

   Mr. Rich, who once worked as a Washington lobbyist for Delaware &amp; Hudson Railway Co., brings considerable political savvy to the job. 
For the past 10 years, senators, representatives and railroad officials have trooped to Delaware Otsego's annual Cooperstown Conference. 
At the company's annual meetings, a member of congress gives the keynote speech. 

   The lobbying pays off, nationally and locally. 
For example, the railroad won a transition rule in the tax reform bill that allowed it to retain certain tax benefits valued at $1.5 million on its track rehabilitation project. 
"I'd help Walter any way I could," says Rep. Sherwood Boehlert (R., N.Y.). 

   And later this month, Mr. Rich will load about 100 New York state politicos and other guests aboard a five-car Delaware Otsego train for a football game between his alma mater, Syracuse, and Colgate. 
Everyone will have to get out at Jamesville, N.Y., however, and finish the trip by bus. 
Delware Otsego doesn't have rights to the last seven miles of Conrail track into Syracuse. 

   Mr. Rich feels equally at home on his track bed as he does entertaining politicians. 
Recently, he rode the line in a truck equipped to travel on both road and rail. 
Rattling over recently renovated track ascending Sparta Mountain in northern New Jersey, Mr. Rich recalled that the tracks once were so overgrown in spots that it looked like "a jungle." 

   Earlier, as the truck bounced over track good for only 10 miles an hour, Richard Hensel, the railroad's vice president of engineering, reassured his boss: "We'll have this up to 25." 

   "Thirty!" 
Mr. Rich snapped. 
"You promised me!" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
