ID: 133	RANK: 88	SCORE: 12.121387
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871102-0007 </DOCNO>
<HL> Merger of USAir, Piedmont Approved;
Challenge to 'Mega-Carriers' Expected
---
By Robert L. Rose and Laurie McGinley
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 11/02/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PIE U AWAL
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
AIRLINES (AIR)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN>
<TEXT>
   The merger of USAir Group Inc. and Piedmont Aviation Inc. is expected to create a profitable new carrier that analysts say would be a strong challenger to the nation's so-called mega-carriers. 

   Ruling Friday afternoon, the Transportation Department approved the merger without conditions -- a surprise to many industry analysts and Capitol Hill observers who predicted that the department would force USAir to sell some of its valuable slots at New York's LaGuardia Airport and Washington National to America West Airlines Inc., the main opponent of the merger. 

   While America West, Phoenix, Ariz., said it would ask for a stay of the decision, Washington-based USAir made plans to complete the $1.56 billion acquisition, which most analysts expect to go through. 
USAir said that while it plans to close the transaction Wednesday, Piedmont, based in Winston-Salem, N.C., will operate under its own name as a subsidiary for at least nine months. 

   The combination would make USAir the nation's seventh-largest airline company, with a market share of about 7%. 
Analysts view the merger as an important, and possibly last, chance for USAir and Piedmont to achieve the size needed to successfully compete with the biggest domestic airlines. 

   "Instead of having five mega-carriers, you now have a presence that can compete effectively east of the Mississippi and build competition in the transcontinental markets to cities on the West Coast," said Steve Lewins, transportation analyst at Citicorp Investment Management Inc. in New York. 

   Operating with hubs in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, USAir serves 77 airports in 31 states. 
Piedmont, with hubs in Charlotte, N.C., Baltimore and Dayton, Ohio, serves 87 airports in 26 states. 
The merger also would allow USAir to build service to the West Coast, connecting the eastern hubs with cities served by its Pacific Southwest Airlines unit. 

   In reversing an earlier recommendation by an administrative law judge, the Transportation Department said the merger wasn't likely "to reduce competition substantially in any relevant market." 

   In September, Ronnie Yoder, the law judge, urged rejection of the merger, arguing that it posed potentially serious competition problems on the East Coast, where the two airlines offer service at more than 50 cities in common. 
The competitive problems would be especially acute, he warned, at LaGuardia and Washington National airports, where takeoffs and departures are controlled by the allocation of a limited number of slots. 

   But Matthew Scocozza, the assistant transportation secretary for policy and international affairs, sharply disagreed with the judge's conclusions. 
In his order approving the transaction, Mr. Scocozza concluded that the merger would be neither anti-competitive nor "inconsistent with the public interest." 

   "We looked at every individual market and found that competition wouldn't suffer and that fares wouldn't go up," said a high-ranking department official, adding that Mr. Yoder "just failed to carry the burden of his argument." 

   Although more than 50 cities are served both by USAir and Piedmont, the department said, only six of those cities aren't served by other jet carriers. 
And of those six, all but two -- Elmira and Ithaca, N.Y. -- are served by commuter airlines affiliated with major carriers. 
Moreover, the department said, the two carriers don't have any common hubs. 

   Not everyone was convinced that consumers would come out ahead. 
Chris Witkowski, executive director of the Ralph Nader-founded Aviation Consumer Action Project, said travelers in markets dominated by the two carriers are likely to face higher fares and no alternative airline if service isn't satisfactory. 

   Edward R. Beauvais, chairman and chief executive officer of America West, said his company plans to ask the federal appeals court in Washington for a stay of the decision. 
"This merger aggravates the domination of the monopoly carriers and makes it even more difficult for competitive services to develop because we can't get in," he said. 

   America West contended the merger would give USAir an unfair advantage at LaGuardia and Washington National airports, but it said it would reconsider its position if USAir agreed to sell it some slots at the two airports. 

   Department officials said they decided it wouldn't be fair to force USAir to sell America West slots at the two airports to get merger approval. 
"If slots should be taken away from anybody at those airports, it should be done on a nondiscriminatory basis" in which all new entrants and incumbent carriers are permitted to make their cases, a senior department official said. 

   The official said the department would look at the question of allocation of slots at the airports and the problem of access by new competitors through its formal rulemaking procedure -- a process that can take from several months to several years. 

   At USAir headquarters, Chairman Edwin I. Colodny said the minimum nine-month transition before a full combination of the airlines is intended to help avoid labor and service problems that have followed other recent airline mergers. 

   Both NWA Inc., parent of Northwest Airlines, and Texas Air Corp. have faced labor unrest and higher levels of customer complaints following their acquisitions. 

   In the past year, Mr. Colodny has abandoned a grow-from-within strategy and sought to more than double the size of the airline, first with the May acquisition of California-based Pacific Southwest Airlines and now with the pending takeover of Piedmont. 

   USAir management still faces the difficult task of merging two different work forces and bringing together companies that have succeeded during deregulation in different ways -- Piedmont with aggressive expansion and USAir by making its Pittsburgh hub a virtual fortress against competitors. 

   But Julius Maldutis, a Salomon Brothers Inc. analyst, said the two carriers should benefit from having similar types of aircraft, strong management and records of working well with labor groups. 

   "I think the USAir-Piedmont combination will form one of the most powerful and profitable competitors in the industry," he said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
