ID: 133	RANK: 91	SCORE: 12.034883
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871222-0105 </DOCNO>
<HL> Henley Turns Down Offer by Santa Fe
To Buy Back Stock, Hints at Proxy Fight
---
By Frederick Rose and Judith Valente
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/22/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> SFX HENG
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
BUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Henley Group Inc. said it spurned a Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. offer to buy its 14.7% stake in Santa Fe, and it hinted at a proxy battle or tender offer for control of the Chicago-based railroad holding company. 

   Henley said yesterday in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that Santa Fe offered last Thursday to exchange a combination of cash and assets for Henley's 23 million Santa Fe shares. 
Henley said it rejected Santa Fe's offer the following day. 

   Details of Santa Fe's proposal weren't disclosed, but analysts speculated that Henley's cursory consideration of it was made only out of fiduciary duty to its own shareholders. 
A person close to the talks said the assets offered by Santa Fe were substantially different from those sought earlier by Henley and that there was an $8 to $10-a-share difference between what each side believed the package of cash and assets to be worth. 

   Henley followed up its rejection with a prepared statement yesterday that said "Santa Fe should maximize the value of its shares for all of Santa Fe shareholders (by again considering) a transaction in which all of the outstanding shares would be acquired by Henley." 

   Santa Fe's failed effort to ward off Henley is only the latest in a lengthy battle with the La Jolla, Calif.-based company, which has interests in manufacturing, engineering, and financial services. 
Santa Fe is attempting to shake off the attentions of both Henley and Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the acquisition-minded Toronto-based real estate concern that last week boosted its stake in Santa Fe to 8.2% from 6.9%. 
Officials of Olympia &amp; York couldn't be reached for comment. 

   Santa Fe, as previously reported, broke off talks a week ago with Henley, which had proposed a package of $25 cash, 0.92 of a share of Henley common stock and $15 in a series of subordinated notes for each Santa Fe share it didn't own. 
Analysts valued the package at about $55 a Santa Fe share, or a total of $7.38 billion for the 85.3% of the 157.3 million shares outstanding that Henley didn't own. 
Santa Fe said at the time that the offer was less than the $63 a share that Santa Fe had proposed to Henley in October. 
It also said it was concerned that there would be "serious and substantial regulatory problems" with a purchase by Henley. 

   In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Santa Fe closed at $47.50, down 50 cents. 
In national over-the-counter trading, Henley closed at $20.75, down 25 cents. 

   Henley yesterday disputed Santa Fe's projection of regulatory problems and -- noting that it was Santa Fe's largest shareholder -- criticized the railroad holding company's plan to sell its big Southern Pacific Transportation Co. railroad unit. 
The plan stems from an Interstate Commerce Commission order issued earlier this year after regulators rejected on antitrust grounds the proposed merger of the Southern Pacific railroad and the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe railroad, both units of the Santa Fe parent company. 

   In the prepared statement, Henley's chairman and chief executive officer, Michael D. Dingman, called the Southern Pacific "a troubled railroad," which he said likely will sell for less than its potential value. 
Some analysts have questioned the plan to sell the Southern Pacific on grounds similar to Mr. Dingman's, noting that the ICC order allows Santa Fe to sell either railroad. 

   Mr. Dingman said that the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe "is a healthy railroad that will bring top value to the shareholders." 
Mr. Dingman then asked rhetorically "why not use it to satisfy the ICC order?" 
He suggested that the Southern Pacific be retained in order to improve its operations and thus make it more valuable. 

   Mr. Dingman sought to dispel worries that Henley may be planning a breakup of the Southern Pacific railroad, in which parts of the line would be sold to various operators. 
He said that Henley hadn't proposed such a breakup, "as some have speculated." 
However, people at the ICC familiar with Henley's discussions there said that Henley officials did discuss such a possibility, which the people at the ICC said would require a detailed regulatory review. 

   Mr. Dingman hinted that Henley may be preparing to launch either a proxy battle or a tender offer for control of Santa Fe. 

   Recalling that Santa Fe recently toughened its anti-takeover defenses by requiring that nominations for new directors be submitted at least 75 days in advance of an annual meeting, he said that Henley had in turn written to Santa Fe asking to be notified of the date of Santa Fe's annual meeting at least 75 days ahead of time. 
Such notification would be vital for any holder planning a proxy battle. 

   As well, the letter to Santa Fe asks the company to ease the provisions of its "poison pill" shareholders' right plan -- an easing that would be important to any hostile bidder for the company's stock. 
Santa Fe recently toughened its anti-takeover defenses by lowering to 20% from 50% the level of its stock which, when bought by an unfriendly acquirer, would trigger holders' right to buy stock or other Santa Fe assets at half price. 

   Henley's letter, which was part of the SEC filing, also asked the Santa Fe board to redeem Santa Fe's preferred-stock purchase rights as soon as possible. 
The letter argued that "all of Santa Fe's stockholders should be treated equally and given the greatest ability to consider all opportunities to maximize the value of their Santa Fe shares." 
It added that "Santa Fe's preferred-stock purchase rights serve as a barrier to this goal and, in the interests of all your stockholders, should be redeemed." 

   Santa Fe declined to comment on Henley's proposal. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
