ID: 133	RANK: 93	SCORE: 12.018682
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870204-0105 </DOCNO>
<HL> Uphill Struggle:
As Conrail Gets Ready
To Go Public, It Still
Faces a Rough Road
---
With Big Cost Cuts Behind,
Line Needs New Business
And New Chief Executive
---
Novel Load: Taxes, Dividends
---
By Daniel Machalaba and Richard Koenig
Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> GOVMT LABOR
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
INITIAL STOCK OFFERINGS (INI)
STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)
EXECUTIVE (EXE)
CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<TEXT>
   In the Berkshire Mountains near Pittsfield, Mass., a steep, wooded hill slows the eastbound freight trains of Consolidated Rail Corp. 

   Several years ago, the pusher locomotives that had helped boost trains up the 10-mile slope were eliminated in a campaign to pare crew costs. 
So today trains often labor along this stretch of track at no more than 15 miles an hour. 

   "All you can do is pray you make it," says Robert O'Brien, a Conrail engineer who attacks the hill at full throttle. 
Sometimes, when the wheels slip badly, crews must "double the hill" by splitting a train into two sections and hauling each separately. 
The maneuver takes hours, further delaying shipments. 

   This kind of cost cutting has helped turn Conrail profitable after years of struggle, and the Reagan administration is preparing to return the railroad to the private sector. 
A public offering of the government's 85% Conrail stake, expected this spring, would be one of the largest initial public offerings ever in the U.S. 
The government hopes to realize at least $1.7 billion. 

   But Conrail's gains in profit from cost-cutting are becoming harder to achieve. 
Its work force, once bloated at 100,000 employees, already has been slashed to 34,000, and further reductions are likely to come slowly. 
Conrail must increasingly seek growth by drumming up new freight business along its 13,000 miles of routes stretching from New England to the Midwest. 
Luring new customers may require risk taking that conflicts with the frugal ways that helped revive Conrail. 

   "Conrail had to cut costs to survive, but that's history," says Robert Platt, who retired last year as Conrail's executive vice president for finance and administration. 
Now Conrail "needs to accelerate its efforts to find and develop new markets." 

   A similar challenge faces other railroads, which must find ways to grow even if their traditional industrial customers in steel, coal and automobiles can't. 
"The railroad industry hasn't been real successful at getting new business," says Stephen Nieman, a vice president of Burlington Northern Railroad. 

   Conrail is trying to lure freight now carried by trucks and to start new ventures. 
One prospect: hauling garbage from New York and New Jersey. 
But some customers complain that Conrail is passing up service innovations to hold down costs. 

   David Lifschultz, the chief executive of Lifschultz Fast Freight Inc. in New York, has urged Conrail to launch a new express piggyback train that would carry truck trailers to Chicago from New York faster than Conrail's current trains. 
But Conrail remains skeptical that it can attract enough shippers to justify the cost. 

   "If Conrail doesn't implement the faster train in six months to a year, we may not be using them very much at all," says Mr. Lifschultz, whose company now spends more than $2 million a year shipping truck trailers on Conrail. 

   Other challenges will face Philadelphia-based Conrail after it becomes publicly traded. 
The railroad will be paying dividends and taxes, obligations it hasn't had before. 
It must find a successor to L. Stanley Crane, the feisty 71-year-old chief executive of the railroad who guided its recovery. 
One formerly obvious candidate, James Hagen, has left Conrail's top marketing job for a similar post in the rail unit of CSX Corp. 
And Conrail faces an effort by rival railroads to break the tight lock that it has held on rail shipments to the New York market. 

   Whether Conrail will continue its resurgence was at the center of the long-running debate over how the government should dispose of the railroad. 
Arguing that Conrail might not survive alone, the Transportation Department in 1985 unsuccessfully supported the $1.2 billion acquisition proposal of Norfolk Southern Corp., which was later raised to $1.9 billion. 

   "A lot of the reasons why Conrail turned around are reasons why you can't be sanguine about its future," James Burnley, the deputy transportation secretary, has observed, noting that Conrail's cost cuts were forced by declining revenue. 

   Congress blocked the proposed merger with Norfolk Southern, deciding that Conrail could survive on its own. 
After it goes public, Conrail will be barred from merging with another railroad for one year and from merging with other types of companies for three years. 

   While the public offering is pending, Mr. Crane and other top Conrail executives declined to comment on the railroad's prospects. 
But in their opposition to the Norfolk Southern bid, they had bristled at suggestions that the railroad might yet fail. 
The executives noted that Conrail had sustained its recovery through the severe 1981-82 recession. 

   Patched together from the Penn Central and other ailing carriers in the mid-1970s, Conrail posted huge losses in its early years. 
Mr. Hagen has since joked about how he would explain his day at the office: "I helped the railroad lose $1 million today." 

   Since 1981, however, Conrail has piled up profits totaling $1.9 billion, including last year's earnings of $431 million on revenue of $3.14 billion. 
Contributing to the turnaround were federal funds to repair track and Conrail marketing innovations to take advantage of loosening regulation of the railroad industry. 
Reliability of service, abysmal in Conrail's early days, improved markedly. 
As a result, United Parcel Service, the country's largest package deliverer, is routing more shipments through Conrail. 
Says Bernard La Londe, a transportation professor at Ohio State University: "People will rank Conrail up there among the major industrial resuscitations of the century." 

   Conrail's managers looked for costs to cut and found plenty. 
They stopped serving towns where business had shriveled, ridding the railroad of one in every four miles of its network. 
Few opportunities to find and sell surplus assets escaped them. 
After the track was removed from one abandoned line in New Jersey, they even sold the earthen fill underneath. 

   While handing out generous severance payments from the government, they swept away jobs by the tens of thousands. 
Donald Swanson, Conrail's vice president for transportation, was dubbed "Neutron Don." 
After he passed through a rail yard, Conrail workers observed, the buildings still stood but the people had vanished. 

   Conrail also saved money by reducing its locomotive fleet, as Mr. O'Brien, the engineer in the Berkshires, has become well aware. 
The railroad has bought new, more powerful locomotives, which it uses to haul longer trains. 
Thomas Hilbert, a Conrail assistant superintendent, acknowledges that trains lack the power to sustain speed over the Berkshires on certain days, such as when wet leaves make rails slippery. 

   Opportunities for further savings exist. 
Clerical jobs, for instance, could be reduced through wider use of computers, and further reductions in train crews may occur if Conrail can win work-rule changes from rail unions. 

   But Conrail may have tacitly agreed to live with other costs, at least for a while, to win labor's support in resisting Norfolk Southern. 
Robert Scardelletti, an officer of the Brotherhood of Railway and Airline Clerks, believes that his alliance with Conrail's management helped save hundreds of jobs in Conrail field offices. 
"I think they appreciated what we were doing" to support a public sale of Conrail, Mr. Scardelletti says. 
Conrail declines to comment. 

   Having squeezed the most exorbitant costs from operations, Conrail now must bring more freight back to its rails. 
The problem is visible in the office of Roy Dumar, a Conrail field supervisor in South Schenectady, N.Y. Companies that use less rail transport in his territory or have stopped using it appear on a large wall map: Bruno Machinery Corp. and Koppers Co., among others. 
Total Conrail freight revenue last year was $3.14 billion, down from $3.21 billion in 1985 and from the peak of $3.56 billion in 1981. 

   "There is a decline of smokestack America that can't be reversed," Charles Marshall, Conrail's senior vice president for marketing and sales, has said. 
"But it can be dealt with." 

   One way is to carry more consumer goods, which puts Conrail in direct competition with trucks and ships. 
Conrail already has become the rail industry's largest hauler of truck trailers and containers from ocean ship lines. 
It is expanding its terminals to handle trains of double-stacked containers, which ship companies use to whisk Far East imports across the U.S. to the East Coast, bypassing the Panama Canal. 

   Other bright spots are the distribution centers emerging on Conrail lines. 
In Mr. Dumar's territory, new stations that combine the long-haul economics of rail service with the flexibility of trucks for local deliveries now handle lumber, beer and plastic pellets used in making milk jugs and hot tubs. 
"I'm fighting for every carload I can get," Mr. Dumar says. 

   Conrail is also cultivating new business with such industrial customers as Bethlehem Steel Corp. 
By building an $11 million branch line to Bethlehem's low-sulfur coal holdings in West Virginia, the railroad was able to win a haulage contract with Detroit Edison Co., a utility facing tighter emission requirements. 
Shipments started in 1985. 
"Without Conrail's investment and marketing efforts, the project would not have gone forward," says William Shaw, the transportation director at Bethlehem. 

   Then there is garbage. 
As Long Island and New Jersey landfills overflow, Conrail is negotiating with local authorities to haul garbage to distant dumping grounds. 
This "suburban ore," as one railroader calls it, could fill many a rail car. 

   But some shippers elsewhere say Conrail isn't wooing them enough. 
Lever Brothers Co. criticizes Conrail's reliance on shippers' agents, rather than Conrail's salesmen, to arrange rail shipment of truck trailers. 
The agents take a middleman's fee. 
Lever Brothers now ships its toothpaste, soap and detergents mostly on other railroads or on trucks. 
Nissan Motor Co. complains that Conrail lost a chance to haul its cars to the East Coast because the railroad's marketing staff was slow to quote rates. 
"It was just one screw-up after another," says Thomas Meyers, Nissan's U.S. transportation manager. 
Conrail declined comment on the complaints. 

   Some competitors contend that Conrail marketing efforts have slipped since the brisk pace of innovation in the early 1980s, when the railroad began to adjust rates and tailor contracts to shipper needs. 
"They really lost the edge they had in the early years, because they were so busy fighting" against Norfolk Southern, says Richard Steiner, another former Conrail marketing executive now at CSX. 
But he predicts that Conrail's marketing efforts "will come back quickly" now that the battle in Washington is over. 

   Conrail is under mounting pressure from shippers to meet truck competition by running shorter, faster trains and investing in a new generation of equipment that can operate on both rail and road. 
But Conrail officials say they must move cautiously lest already-thin profit margins narrow further. 
"The name of the game for railroads is not to carry all the freight," Mr. Crane told a transportation group last summer, "but to carry the profitable freight." 

   In addition to prospecting for new business, Conrail must defend its virtual monopoly on rail service to large markets around New York City. 
The government once sought to maintain competition in the area but failed to find a workable plan amid the controversy that surrounded the collapse of the Penn Central. 
About a year ago, several Conrail rivals, including CSX, Delaware Otsego Corp. and Guilford Transportation Industries Inc., strung together a hodgepodge of their own routes plus trackage rights on a Conrail line to snake a path into New York. 

   It remains to be seen whether CSX will wrest much freight from Conrail, which offers the faster route to New York. 
But, a CSX executive says, "We have big plans to expand that market." 
The Conrail rivals have already attracted the business of Sea-Land Corp., a container shipping company, and are negotiating with other concerns. 

   Conrail appears to be striking back. 
It forces Sea-Land's trains to move off the Conrail line at Binghamton, N.Y., and onto a siding to change crews and locomotives. 
The maneuver delays the train for hours. 
A Conrail spokesman says it is merely trying to prevent delays in its own service. 

   But William Roberts, a Guilford engineer, says he knows an old-fashioned railroad war when he is in one. 
On one haul, a Sea-Land train is shunted to the siding in Binghamton for a locomotive change, and he waits more than an hour before he gets permission from Conrail to return to its line. 
Later he must stop for half an hour when Conrail orders two of its own trains to pass the Sea-Land train. 

   All in all, it is a bad day for Mr. Roberts, who operates the train on the Binghamton to Buffalo leg of its transcontinental journey. 
Near Elmira, N.Y., an electrical malfunction in the lead Guilford locomotive slows the train to a crawl. 
Mr. Roberts says, "My wife wonders why, when I get home, I want a few brews." 

   (See: "Corrections &amp; Amplifications: James Burnley" -- WSJ Feb. 9, 1987) 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
