ID: 133	RANK: 95	SCORE: 11.997788
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870721-0015 </DOCNO>
<HL> Henley Plans
To Boost Stake
In Santa Fe
---
Firm to Ask U.S. Approval
For Up to a 25% Position;
Stock Buyback to Grow
---
By Frederick Rose
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 07/21/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> HENG SFX
TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)
TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)
BUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Henley Group Inc. plans to seek U.S. permission to boost its holding in Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp. to as much as 25%, Michael Dingman, chairman and chief executive officer, said in an interview. 

   The plan to buy more shares could be a prelude to a bid for Santa Fe, but Mr. Dingman declined to say whether Henley will buy more shares or seek control of the diversified railway concern. 

   "Given the current market conditions, we think it's an attractive opportunity to buy the stock," Mr. Dingman said. 
He added that Henley will "retain the flexibility to increase our ownership or not or to sell all or part of our position." 
Henley, a La Jolla, Calif.-based concern with widely diverse holdings, currently holds a 5% stake in Santa Fe. 

   Santa Fe has been the subject of takeover speculation for several months. 
Market interest has focused on the company's valuable real estate holdings and the prospect that it must sell part of its vast railroad network. 

   A spokesman for Santa Fe declined to comment on Henley's plans. 

   Santa Fe shares closed yesterday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange at $50.875, off 62.5 cents. 
That would give the company an indicated value of almost $8 billion. 

   In the interview, Mr. Dingman also said that Henley plans to buy back as much as 24% of its stock at $28 a share, or a total of about $700 million, expanding on the company's already-aggressive repurchase program. 
Henley shares closed yesterday at $27.75, unchanged, in national over-the-counter trading. 

   Mr. Dingman added that Henley is considering new partnership structures and financing for its investments, including its Santa Fe holding. 

   Henley plans to file soon with the Justice Department and Federal Trade Commission under antitrust law, Mr. Dingman said. 
The filing doesn't itself mean that Henley will buy any more Santa Fe Southern Pacific stock but fulfills a legal requirement for further purchases. 

   Henley disclosed in March that, prior to the end of 1986, it bought 7.9 million shares, or about 5%, of Chicago-based Santa Fe Southern Pacific. 
Henley hasn't publicly stated the purpose of its purchase of Santa Fe shares. 

   While Mr. Dingman is silent on Henley's plans for Santa Fe, he has made little secret in the past about his acquisitive interests. 
Late last year, about the time Henley was buying the Santa Fe shares, Mr. Dingman said the company was interested in buying companies "in the $2 billion to $8 billion range" and that it was then "looking at several companies." 
Moreover, Mr. Dingman and others at Henley believe that larger companies, with market values above $5 billion, now offer the greatest profit opportunity for takeovers. 

   Much of the recent speculation surrounding Santa Fe Southern Pacific was sparked last month, when the Interstate Commerce Commission said it wouldn't permit the company to complete the merger of its Southern Pacific and Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe railroad units because of antitrust reasons. 
The action will force the parent to sell at least one of the railroads, and bidding for those assets promises to be intense. 

   The Henley announcement comes at a particularly vulnerable time for Santa Fe. 
The turmoil over the ICC's refusal to approve the merger led to the ouster in April of its chief executive; it is still searching for a permanent successor. 
And though the company plans to sell some units, it hasn't yet settled on a new long-term strategy. 
Sometime soon, the company must decide whether to remain a railroad or change what has been the focus of its business for more than 100 years. 

   Nonetheless, Santa Fe could fight a takeover effort if the investor group decides to launch one. 
Santa Fe shareholders last year adopted an anti-takeover "poison pill" measure that enables it to create and distribute additional shares when a suitor acquires 20% or more of the company. 

   And the company seems disposed to fight. 
"We have never said the whole company is for sale," a Santa Fe spokesman said. 
He added that John S. Reed, Santa Fe's interim chairman and chief executive officer, has said in the past that the company intends to remain "the master of our destiny." 

   Santa Fe Southern Pacific was created in 1983 through the merger of Santa Fe Industries Inc. and Southern Pacific Co. 
The railroad units were operated separately, however, pending regulatory review. 

   To accumulate an additional 20% of Santa Fe would cost Henley $1.6 billion at current prices. 

   Henley's purchase of its own shares is part of a continuing program to reduce its stock outstanding, Mr. Dingman said. 
In the 14 months since Henley became a publicly traded company, it has lopped almost 18% off its stock outstanding, reducing it to 103.2 million shares. 

   Mr. Dingman disclosed that the drop from the earlier total includes 6.8 million shares purchased under a little-noticed, separate purchase program started last fall. 
Those shares, bought on the open market at an average price of $24.76 a share, were acquired as part of a 10 million-share authorization. 
Mr. Dingman said that Henley may continue to buy back its stock under that separate authorization after it completes the new tender offer for its own shares. 

   If all 25 million shares are repurchased under the new plan, the total would be reduced to 78.2 million shares, a 38% drop from the May 1986 peak. 

   Mr. Dingman said that the company's management and directors, who currently hold about 6.7% of Henley's stock, won't be tendering their shares under the new offer. 
Their holding would increase to 8.8% of Henley's stock outstanding if all 25 million shares are tendered. 

   Henley's stock repurchases are a sharp reversal from its beginnings barely a year ago as unwanted assets from Allied Corp.'s 1984 merger with Signal Cos. 
Shares in the newly formed Henley Group were distributed to shareholders of Allied-Signal Inc. in May 1986. 
A day after the distribution was completed, Henley sold 60 million new shares to the public for $1.2 billion. 

   In the interview, Mr. Dingman said the change in direction is the result of changes in capital markets, which he said provide ready cash to would-be borrowers. 
"As a result, we don't think that Henley needs the same size equity base in order to do large transactions." 
He called the proposed repurchase program "a return to the shareholders." 

   "We're not taking a position on whether shareholders should or shouldn't tender their stock; we're just giving them the opportunity," Mr. Dingman said. 

   Mr. Dingman said that Henley will finance the stock buyback initially through a new $2.5 billion line of credit, which supplants an earlier $3 billion line. 
Because the repurchase will be financed entirely through borrowings, Henley will retain the $1.3 billion it now holds in cash and marketable securities, Mr. Dingman said. 

   He said that Henley is strongly considering restructuring its General Chemical and Manufacturing Group and distributing shares in that company to its shareholders. 
The distribution probably will comprise more than 50% of the group's shares, Mr. Dingman added. 

   As part of future purchases and sales of assets, Henley will use partnerships and project financings of a type that won't impose substantial direct burdens on Henley, Mr. Dingman said. 
He added that the company planned to put its Santa Fe holding into a new subsidiary. 
Further purchases of Santa Fe stock would be bought and financed by the new subsidiary, he said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
