ID: 300	RANK: 70	SCORE: 9.704975
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870331-0103 </DOCNO>
<HL> Business World:
Californians Will Pay Dearly for PURPA Power
---
By George Melloan</HL>
<DD> 03/31/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PCG GOVMT
UTILITIES (UTI) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co. is the nation's largest electric utility, which means it deals in big numbers. 
One big number it is dealing in these days is $850 million, the amount it will be adding to its customers' electric bills in a few years unless a strange federal law known as PURPA is altered or reinterpreted. 

   PG&amp;E Chief Executive Richard A. Clarke finds this "outrageous," but he isn't getting much help in convincing state and federal regulatory agencies of that. 
"Our allies in this should be consumerists, but they are slow in coming around," he says. 
One reason may be that both PURPA and the active segment of the "consumerist" movement were both products of 1970s "alternative" politics. 
But more about that later. 

   PURPA stands for Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act. 
It was one of five parts of the National Energy Act of 1978, perhaps the most mischievous and misguided piece of legislation ever passed by Congress. 
All Congress needed to do to end energy shortages in 1978 was repeal price controls on crude oil, which is how the problem ultimately was solved. 
A one-sentence law would have done it. 
Instead, Congress wrote the massive energy act that still is on the books and still is exacting enormous hidden costs from consumers. 

   PURPA forces electric utilities to use "alternative" sources of energy -- windmills, sewage gas, solar collectors and what have you. 
Federal regulators supply guidelines but direct administration was put in the hands of state public utility commissions. 
The California of Jerry Brown applied PURPA with a vengeance, the result being that Californians now are stuck with one of the country's most expensive interpretations of the act. 

   Dick Clarke of PG&amp;E explains how it works: "PURPA requires us to buy power produced by so-called independent power producers. 
We've been required to execute contracts to buy power even if we don't need it. 
It's a very expensive resource; we can't dispatch it and we can't count on it. 
So we have all these contracts for something like 9,000 megawatts. 
Our whole system has only a 15,000-megawatt capacity, so these contracts represent 60% of our energy capacity. 

   "Now so far, only 1,600 megawatts have been constructed; the rest are just pieces of paper. 
But even if only 45% of the other 7,000 megawatts come on line, it will be an additional cost to our customers of $850 million a year." 

   Is all this power coming from those much discussed "alternative" sources? 
Mr. Clarke waves towards San Francisco Bay, the view from his office window, and says there are indeed windmills across the bay. 
"We buy the power, because we have to, and it's an expensive resource." 
But you don't get 9,000 megawatts from windmills or any other of these nonconventional sources. 
The "independents" presenting PG&amp;E with the most troublesome mustsign contracts are not little operations gleaning free power from wind generators, solar collectors and other alternative sources. 
Rather, they are other big firms. 
For fuel, they use mainly oil and gas. 

   Were it not for PURPA and especially the interpretation of the law by the California PUC, California consumers conceivably might benefit from what these "independents" are doing. 
There has been a revolution in power generation. 
General Electric Co. years ago began applying jet-engine technology to large-scale gas turbines to generate power. 
As that technology has advanced, gas turbines have become the most efficient means of generation, and especially so in "combined-cycle" facilities where the turbine's heat is captured to generate steam. 
Mr. Clarke says that a modern gas turbine needs about half the BTUs to generate a kilowatt of power as some of PG&amp;E's older plants need. 

   But the Fuel Use Act, yet another part of the 1978 legislation, says that oil or gas may not be used for new power-generating equipment, which effectively precludes use of gas turbines by utilities themselves. 
However, if electricity generation is a spinoff from other uses of these fuels, such as producing steam for an industrial process, up to 50% of that electricity can be sold. 
It also is possible for an "independent" to get a "cogeneration exemption" from the fuel-use act. 

   "What happened," says Mr. Clarke, "was that the manufacturers of utility equipment decided it was a great business. 
The GEs, the Babcock &amp; Wilcoxes, in conjunction with major oil companies, built these gas-fired and oil-fired generators and we were forced to sign contracts with them. 
The prices under the law were set by state regulatory commissions at what is called avoided cost, which is the price that the facility you otherwise would have had to build would have cost you. 
They were using projections of oil at $60 a barrel at that time in order to determine what would be the avoided cost." 

   The result of that inflated cost basis has been that the independent suppliers have struck gold in California. 
Mr. Clarke says their profits, using highly efficient turbines and charging regulator-set prices, are double or triple a utility's normal profits. 

   Even subsidiaries of other utilities have entered the California market. 
"We've got Houston here, we've got Utah here -- all have a cogeneration subsidiary that works outside their service territory." 

   Now, if PG&amp;E customers are going to be paying an extra $850 million a year for the greater good of GE, Chevron, Bechtel and other giants, why aren't California consumerists banging on the door of the California Public Utilities Commission and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission demanding a change in the interpretation of PURPA? 
FERC is currently holding hearings to consider just that. 
The reason seems to be that those consumerists spawned by the alternative culture of the 1970s would find it rather embarrassing to complain about something they had so much to do with creating. 

   Naderites of that era primarily focused their attack on big business. 
Pacific G&amp;E is a private corporate giant, and hence still is regarded as the enemy. 
The 1978 energy act requires that public money be supplied to "qualified" persons who go before public utility commissions to testify against rate increases for regulated behemoths such as PG&amp;E. 

   There is irony to be found in the fact that General Electric and other giants, using a technology developed with the aid of defense contracts, are making a very good thing out of legislation that originally was intended to employ "small-is-beautiful" principles and "limits-to-growth" moral philosophy. 
American corporations have proved to be far more resilient than their critics might have imagined in the 1970s. 

   To the extent the corporate critics forced companies to exercise their adaptive powers, it might be said that the critics contributed something to technological advancement, although in most cases not intentionally. 
But the legislation left on the books is becoming more and more expensive. 
Absolute repeal of the 1978 energy act would be one of the most beneficial things Congress could do for the American economy, but given the interests now tied up in that act, repeal seems unlikely. 
Dick Clarke of PG&amp;E would settle for some regulatory reinterpretation. 
For an $850 million saving to California consumers, that doesn't seem like much to ask. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
