ID: 149	RANK: 5	SCORE: 11.184728
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ890802-0003 </DOCNO>
<DD> = 890802 </DD>
<AN> 890802-0003. </AN>
<HL> Alligator Farming
@  Shows There's a Lot
@  To Be Said for Cows
@  ---
@  But High Prices on Reptiles
@  Make Risks Worthwhile
@  For Louisiana Farmers
@  ----
@  By Mark Robichaux
@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL>
<DD> 08/02/89 </DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO>
<IN> TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX) </IN>
<DATELINE> HOUMA, La.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Seven feet long, with a jaw full of evil teeth, the alligator lurking nearby is one mean matron. 
So Dane Ledet doesn't linger by the muddy mound of swamp grass where he has just landed in a helicopter. 
Within seconds, he scoops the 36 fresh eggs from her nest and scrambles back into the waiting copter. 

   A scene from "Louisiana Jones and the Jaws of Death?" 
No, this is farming. 
Mr. Ledet is merely replenishing his herd -- by raiding an alligator's nest. 
He is one of a new strain of courageous entrepreneurs who farms alligators. 

   Alligators have yet to find a welcome mat at Louisiana parish fairs. 
Who wants to hang a ribbon on a critter that might eat it, along with your arm? 
Nobody oohs and aahs over alligators at 4-H Club exhibits, either. 
At Louisiana's finest country clubs, gentlemen farmers still talk racehorses -- not alligators. 

   Nonetheless, alligators are becoming important livestock in this state. 
Farmers from Natchitoches to New Orleans have begun to raise them, forgoing blue ribbons for cash. 
Prices on alligator hides and meat have reached record highs, although they may not stay so high if the supply keeps increasing. 

   State wildlife officials expect that nearly 75,000 alligators will be raised this year on Louisiana's farms, triple the herd in 1987. 
Veteran alligator farmers complain that newcomers are constantly hounding them for advice. 
More than 200 people are on a waiting list for state alligator-farm permits. 
Alligator sections have been added to aquaculture classes in state universities. 

   Alligator skins once were the booty of poachers who devastated the alligator population and helped put "alligator mississippiensis" on the endangered species list and helped make alligator products unfashionable. 
But the wild population has exploded in recent years, and the alligator was delisted in 1987. 

   By then, after years of experimental alligator husbandry, Ted Joanen and Larry McNease, Louisiana wildlife researchers, had already successfully promoted alligator farming. 
They saw it as a way to stop poaching, ensure a supply of skins and foster new business that was desperately needed in a state whose economy was depressed by the oil glut. 
To protect the species, state law requires farmers to return a sizable portion -- 17% this year -- of their nurtured, four-foot-long stock to the wild. 

   Raising alligators is different from raising cows. 
The alligator has a walnut-size brain. 
But its jaws can snap a farmer's arm like a breadstick; they exert a force of 3,000 pounds a square inch. 
Stealing their eggs, corralling the critters and hauling them to market are hazardous. 

   Alligators lack a strong herding instinct. 
About a month ago, Skeet Rogers, proud new part-owner of Bayou Pierre Gator Farm in Natchitoches, had to move half of his 2,000 alligator herd into a larger barn. 
He first thought to move them through a "chute" made from sheets of tin. 

   "We were going to herd 'em like cattle with sticks," he says. 
"It was a mess. 
They tried to climb over each other and they started fighting." 
With the help of 14 leery volunteers, each wearing two pairs of thick leather gloves to protect his hands, Mr. Rogers hand-carried the alligators from barn to barn. 

   At market time, Mr. Rogers loads some 200 live four-foot gators into an old, gutted school bus for the hour-and-a-half drive to Ville Platte. 
Only a sheet of plywood separates the driver from his passengers. 
The driver is "usually the guy who draws the shortest straw. 
I'm serious," says Mr. Rogers, adding: "Usually a car follows -- just in case." 

   Like most alligator farmers in Louisiana, Mr. Rogers houses his animals in half-sunken tin-sided structures of cinder blocks on concrete slabs. 
Inside one of these barns, the temperature is a humid 89 degrees, just about right for gators. 
They are at home in a few inches of water reeking of reptile urine. 

   The smell takes some getting used to. 
On their uncle Raywood Stelly's Raywood's Kajun Alligator Farms at Kaplan, the 17-year-old Stelly twins, Velma and Thelma, daily plop gobs of feed mix to the gators as part of their farm chores. 
The feed is one part nutria, a prolific swamp rat; one part croaker, an inexpensive fish, and one part vitamin-fortified dry food that a producer packs in sacks labeled Alligator Feed. 
"The first time we did this, I couldn't believe it," says Thelma, her arms sunk in a bucket of bloody nutria carcasses. 

   "Now we're used to it -- almost," says Velma, swatting at a swarm of flies around her head. 

   To build their herds without having to collect eggs, some farmers buy them for $5 to $8 each. 
But most collect their own, paying landowners for the rights to do so, and search by airboat and helicopter. 
They work over a three-week laying period that usually comes in June. 
Newly hatched alligators "come out mean as hell and biting," a farmer says. 

   In Ville Platte, Steele McAndrew collects eggs on his own pond, where he keeps his breeding stock. 
Checking the pond, he totes a 10-foot plastic pipe to fend off his ungracious wards. 
As he nears a nest, a seven-foot gator appears from nowhere, hissing and blowing at him in the heat of midmorning. 

   "These are like bears in a park," he says, easing the pipe a few feet from the reptile's snout. 
"They don't have any fear left in them." 
Before Mr. McAndrew can finish, the alligator jumps and sprints toward him in short bursts. 
Then it seizes the tooth-scarred pipe in its jaws. 

   So ferocious is the animal that Mr. McAndrew guesses her eggs lie nearby. 
He hatches the precious eggs he collects in an incubator. 
If the heat exceeds 91 degrees or drops below 89, the eggs are endangered, and a heat-sensitive alarm rings in Mr. McAndrew's bedroom. 

   Mr. McAndrew was one of the pioneer Louisiana alligator farmers eight years ago. 
His farm, which is becoming part of a joint venture, will soon expand to 30,000 alligators from 6,000. 
He concedes that an alligator farm isn't exactly the Garden of Eden. 
"A 90-degree building, 100% humidity, rancid meat, getting splashed with alligator urine and water -- it's just not ideal conditions," he says, adding that "a lot of people in Louisiana are desperate." 

   Alligator hides fetch the farmer $39 a linear foot. 
Farm-bred gators, whose hides are used for handbags and other small goods, typically are slaughtered when they are four feet long. 
Hides from bigger, wild alligators, used for luggage, bring about $48 a foot. 
A field-dressed four-foot-long alligator brings farmers about $20 for the meat. 

   There are alligator farms in Florida and Texas, too. 
But alligator-farm technical knowledge and state support is centered here; for nearly 20 years, Messrs. 
Joanen and McNease did their research on alligators in captivity in the marsh at Rockefeller Refuge in southern Louisiana. 
Foreign countries, mainly in Africa, have engineered their alligator and crocodile farming enterprises on the Louisiana model. 

   The market for alligators would be larger, alligator men say, if it weren't for the mistaken belief that the alligator is endangered. 
Even with increases in demand over the past few years, the world market for crocodile and alligator hides has regained only half the volume of 15 years ago. 
"It's not mass fashion right now," says Lee Goldman, president of Campaign Inc., distributor of Polo Ralph Lauren Corp. alligator products. 
But, he says, "If there are more skins available, they're reasonably priced and they look good, I'm all in favor of it." 

   Nature lovers, Mr. Joanen says, should consider that the farmers who skin alligators also are returning healthy four-footers to the wild. 
"If you want to help the marsh, and the alligator," he says, "buy an alligator handbag." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
