ID: 264	RANK: 34	SCORE: 13.361714
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881028-0139 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: A Reading Tour of Nature </HL>
<AUTHOR> Joseph J. Ellis </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Back in the 18th century, when the natural world was still supposed to make rational sense, the American painter and curator Charles Willson Peale attempted to capture nature's laws in his beloved museum in Philadelphia. 
There one could find stuffed birds, monkeys and squirrels, a five-foot-long rattlesnake with 15 rattles, a sawed-off finger, a five-legged cow, mastodon bones unearthed in Ulster County, N.Y., a bald eagle and portraits of the Founding Fathers looking down on this wild menagerie from the walls above. 

   "A Writer's America: Landscape in Literature" (Knopf, 240 pages, $24.95) by Alfred Kazin shares the same subject matter and the same beguiling incoherence of Peale's museum. 
Purportedly a survey of environmental imagery in American literature, it turns out to be a walking tour through the memories and impressions of a distinguished American literary critic. 
Mr. Kazin, who lacks any clear destination, periodically merges with the landscape, but wants us to enjoy the trip as much as he obviously does. 

   "I owe him many things," said the Swedish botanist Peter Kahn about fellow botanist John Bartram, "for he possessed the great quality of communicating everything he knew." 
Mr. Kazin demonstrates the same "great quality" here, tossing out epiphanies and opinions on virtually every canyon, river, sunrise and skyscraper ever noticed by a prominent American writer from William Bradford (on Cape Cod) to Norman Mailer (on the lunar landscape). 

   For example, the first chapter, entitled "New Worlds," begins with Thomas Jefferson's "Notes on the State of Virginia" (1781). The text includes several long quotations from Jefferson's descriptions of the Shenandoah Valley, accompanied by a full-page illustration of Natural Bridge, which Jefferson considered "an arch so elevated, so light, and springing as it were up to heaven . . ." But we quickly drop back a century to Bradford's Plymouth, then move forward again to William (son of John) Bartram's botanical gardens, encounter Hector St. John de Crevecoeur's ode to the pastoral beauties of the Mohawk Valley, then share John James Aubudon's astonishment at the slaughter of passenger pigeons on the banks of the Green River in Kentucky:
   "The pigeons, arriving by the thousands, alighted everywhere, one above the other, until solid masses were formed on the branches all around. . . . 
The scene was one of uproar and confusion. 
I found it quite useless to speak or even to shout. . . . 
I was made aware of the firing only by seeing the shooters re-loading. . . . 
When each man had as many as he could possibly dispose of, the dogs were let loose on the remainder." 

   Crevecoeur reappears to deliver the tragically typical verdict on those people we now call Native Americans: "They are hastening towards a total annihilation, and this may be the last compliment that will ever be paid them by any traveler." 
Robust selections from the journals of Lewis and Clark follow, along with elegant illustrations, and the chapter concludes with commentary on Francis Parkman's "The Oregon Trail" (1849), which Mr. Kazin likens to "the blow-by-blow description of physical exertion that Mark Twain was to get into 'Roughing It' and 'Huckleberry Finn,' Hemingway in 'Big Two-Hearted River.'" 

   Subsequent chapters find Mr. Kazin bringing the same roving mandate to the pocket-sized wilderness of Emerson's Concord and Thoreau's Walden Pond; then to the vast expanse west of the Mississippi, where Twain, Willa Cather and Jack London have the best words and Frederic Remington the best pictures; then to the provincial villages haunted by the brooding temperaments of Emily Dickinson and Robert Frost; then we visit the "power centers," chiefly New York City, Chicago, Boston and Washington, and eventually end the trip in (where else?) 
California, which becomes a fitting symbol for American restlessness and rootlessness. 
All along we are guided by Mr. Kazin's perky intelligence, which dares to wander without a compass and to discuss Twain's steamboat captain, Whitman's lyrical incongruities, Melville's white whales and Emerson's vaunted serenity in the same paragraph. 

   It should be reasonably clear by now that Mr. Kazin's book is neither informed by nor burdened with the growing body of literary theory generated over the past 20 years. 
Like Bernard de Voto and Edmund Wilson, Mr. Kazin always has been most comfortable skirting the edges of academic criticism, savoring his interpretations of Emerson or Faulkner for reasons more personal than methodological. 

   "A Writer's America" is, simply, a handsomely packaged and highly idiosyncratic sampling of the literary moments and locales that have given one of America's most thoughtful intellectuals the greatest pleasure. 
If I read him right, that personal pleasure is what Mr. Kazin wants to share with his readers. 

   ---
   Mr. Ellis is professor of history and dean of the faculty at Mount Holyoke College, currently on leave as a Guggenheim Fellow. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
