ID: 264	RANK: 49	SCORE: 10.742677
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880524-0128 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Literary Logrolling as Art </HL>
<AUTHOR> Donna Rifkind </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Publishing a volume of introductions to various novels is a bit like throwing a party for guests of honor who never show up: all anticipation, little point. 
This is what librarian Anne Skillion has done in a new collection entitled "Introducing the Great American Novel" (Quill/Morrow, 256 pages, $19.95). 

   But of course there is a point to a volume of this kind, and it comes in two parts -- ambassadorial and commercial. 
The book appears under the sponsorship of something called A New York Public Library Publishing Project. 
In his preface, Vartan Gregorian, the library's president, assures readers that Ms. Skillion's work "has been derived from material we conserve, and it goes beyond the confines of our building and city to those who love the printed word." 

   Then the writer George Plimpton in his introduction cheerfully states, "What we have in this present volume are in essence blurbs in extenso." 
He goes on to explain how Allan Bloom's "The Closing of the American Mind" was pushed to the top of the best-seller list largely because of the introduction that Saul Bellow provided for it. 
Mr. Plimpton imagines that all writers wonder "who might be interested in doing an introduction to what {they've} done. 
Or at the very least a blurb. 
It can make all the difference!" 

   According to its preface and introduction, then, this book exists as an advertisement for the New York Public Library and a paean for the tradition of selling books through endorsements by famous people. 
Neither of these is an immoral intention, but in their promotional zeal Messrs. 
Gregorian and Plimpton seem to have lost interest entirely in the Great American Novel itself. 

   Despite the dubious motivations for such a project, it turns out that Ms. Skillion's collection is not without interest. 
Of the novels being introduced, some are such steadfast classics as "The Scarlet Letter," "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" and "Moby Dick." 
Others, such as Ralph Ellison's "Invisible Man," are less antique but no less memorable. 
While there is some question as to whether all the novels under discussion can be called "great," Ms. Skillion makes only one outrageous -- and rather hilarious -- error in her selection: She includes a dissection by Tom Wolfe of Norman Mailer's "An American Dream" in which Mr. Wolfe so viciously elaborates on the weaknesses of the book that one wonders why Ms. Skillion ever saw enough merit in Mr. Mailer's novel to include it. 

   The introductions take four forms: a reminiscence or biographical sketch of the novel's author, as in Budd Schulberg's piece on Nathanael West (author of "The Day of the Locust"); a generalized interpretation of the work itself, such as the British writer V.S. Pritchett's analysis of Stephen Crane's "The Red Badge of Courage"; a history of the novel's publication, as in William Faulkner's introduction to his own "Sanctuary" or Ford Madox Ford on Hemingway's "A Farewell to Arms"; and a sociological comment about an issue the work raises, as in David Bradley's sensitive essay about his reactions as a black novelist to Richard Wright's "Native Son." 

   Several of the essays are of the highest quality. 
Probably no one has written more penetratingly on "The Scarlet Letter" than Henry James in his famous chapter on the book from his "Hawthorne" of 1879. 
Lionel Trilling on Mr. James's novel "The Bostonians" is brilliant, and Rebecca West exhibits her usual sparkle and idiosyncrasy in her introduction to Sinclair Lewis's "Babbitt." 
In his discussion of Edith Wharton's "The House of Mirth," Irving Howe is thorough and intelligent, if a bit plodding, and Robert Brustein on Joseph Heller's "Catch-22" is equally shrewd, if hyperbolic in his praise. 

   Other selections are conspicuously poor. 
The distinguished critic Alfred Kazin offers a piece on "Moby Dick" that is as pompous and windy as a junior high-school textbook -- the kind of prose that made you swear never to read American lit again. 
And Malcolm Cowley's essay on F. Scott Fitzgerald has the wrong emphasis: It highlights the importance of money in Mr. Fitzgerald's stories, of the struggle between "wealth as fluid income and wealth as a solid possession," while failing to make clear the author's main preoccupation, which is how wealth and other forms of power can lead to wasted lives. 

   As an editor Ms. Skillion's chief shortcoming is her reticence. 
She does not always supply the dates for the introductions, and her biographical information on the authors is extremely scant. 
It would have been useful, for example, had she mentioned that Wilfrid Sheed has written widely on Catholic themes, as this explains the sprinkling of religious references in his brief, unilluminating introduction to Kurt Vonnegut's "Slaughterhouse-Five." 

   When the book succeeds, it does so in spite of itself, with the appearance of the masterful pieces by Messrs. 
James and Trilling, and a few more; otherwise, it is a random basting together of ingratiating, often valueless criticism. 
"Introducing the Great American Novel" is a literary curio of the sort one sees every now and then in a publisher's catalog: a book that has more to do with congratulating literary taste than with appreciating literature itself. 
Which brings up the question of what the next volume of the New York Public Library Publishing Project will be: a celebration of appendices to famous books? 
An offering of colophons? 
The anticipation mounts. 

   ---
   Miss Rifkind is assistant managing editor of The New Criterion. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
