ID: 264	RANK: 70	SCORE: 8.665622
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880920-0024 </DOCNO>
<HL> Children -- Coping With Change: For Many Kids, Playtime Isn't Free Time --- Educators Say Rigid Schedules Kill Spontaneity </HL>
<AUTHOR> Carol Hymowitz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
      {First of a Series}
   Five-year-old Elizabeth Bush became fast friends with Aliza during day camp this summer. 
Naturally she wanted her new friend to visit her home in Manhattan and play -- but that invitation took on the complexities of a business negotiation. 

   Elizabeth's nanny called Aliza's mother to schedule a "play date." 
The mother balked, insisting that she first become acquainted with Elizabeth's parents. 
A phone interview between the children's mothers ensued, with both exchanging information about their professions and child-rearing practices. 
Finally a two-hour play date was agreed upon -- for 10 days later. 

   "When I was a kid and wanted to play, I walked out of my house and knocked on a neighbor's door -- but those days are gone," says Elizabeth's mother, Pat. 
Now, she says "my friends' kids carry executive Day-Timer calendars" to keep track of dozens of activities and formal dates with friends. 

   This is today's play for more and more children. 
Schedules and supervision replace spontaneity and freedom. 
Lessons, not make-believe, are the rule. 
Indeed, if Mark Twain penned "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" today, his barefoot hero would be shuttling between tennis camp and piano lessons instead of dreaming up pranks with his pal Huck Finn. 

   Educators and psychologists worry that such rigid regimens are producing passive -- and pressured -- kids. 
"I'm seeing seven, eight and nine-year-olds who are anxious and angry because they're overprogrammed with activities that don't meet their needs," says Charles Clegg, a Los Angeles psychologist. 
"They're being told what they should like -- which teaches them passivity -- and also told to perform." 

   Jane Healy, a learning specialist at the private Hathaway Brown School in Cleveland, agrees that scheduled play often isn't play at all. 
"Play is spontaneous and self-initiated by definition," she says. 
Children who are used to constant direction in lessons and team sports "are terrified to take risks" -- from climbing a tree to tackling a difficult math problem, she maintains. 

   What's contributing to the orchestrated play? 
The return of women to the work force has required them to secure supervision for their children after school and in the summer -- and often the only option is organized classes. 
"We're seeing a lot of lessons used for caretaking," says Susan Brownlee, an administrator at the private Ellis School in Pittsburgh. 

   Another factor: fast-track couples eager for a fast track for their kids. 
They're pushing them sooner and more often into activities they believe will enhance their kids' chances to land at the best schools and later, the best jobs. 

   Concern about children's safety -- even in suburban and rural areas -- is yet another issue. 
The era of missing children's pictures on milk cartons has effectively eliminated Huck Finn-type adventures. 

   "When my kids visit a friend a few blocks away, I want them to call me the minute they arrive, and if they make a stop along the way, they have to call from there," says Carol Marchick, a working mother who lives in affluent Palo Alto, Calif. 
"I'm frightened by all the child kidnappings and stories of child abuse." 

   Whatever the reasons, "the days of most middle-class children are so filled . . . that they have hardly any time to simply be themselves," writes child psychologist Bruno Bettleheim. 
"They are deprived of those long hours and days of leisure to think their own thoughts, an essential element in the development of creativity." 

   Consider 10-year-old Lindsay Corbett of Summit, N.J. 
This summer she attended an "enrichment program" at a local high school to study word processing, woodworking, pottery and flute, and also enrolled in a tennis camp. 
Now that school has started, she is even busier, with a different activity slated nearly every day after classes: flute lessons on Tuesday afternoons, Girl Scouts on Wednesdays, piano on Thursdays, tennis on Fridays and soccer on Saturdays and Sundays. 

   "She's a straight A student but very well-rounded," her mother says. 
And Lindsay insists "I can handle it all." 

   But some kids aren't so sure they can handle it all, or want to. 
Nine-year-old Max Gross of Brooklyn has begged his parents to let him quit an after-school program he attends. 
"I'd rather be home alone, playing a game that's meant for just one person," he says. 

   That's impossible at the program, where he's surrounded by dozens of active kids. 
And he says he's often lonelier there than at home. 
"The other kids aren't exactly nice to you. 
It's their free time -- and they don't really want to be there, so they take it out on you." (His parents insist on the program because of an attempted burglary at their apartment last year.) 

   Other overprogrammed children experience burnout. 
Eight-year-old Lisa Sweet of Manhattan signed up for five after-school activities last year, including tennis, gymnastics and ceramics -- but soon felt overwhelmed and unable to keep up with her homework. 
"I worried that it was going to be too much for her but knew the schedule would be easier for me, so I didn't discourage it," admits her mother, Ellen, a magazine editor. 
She scrambled to adjust her own work schedule when Lisa insisted she needed some free time after school. 

   Kids who resist the new scheduled play, however, may find themselves without playmates. 
Twelve-year-old Peter Reaves of Pittsburgh treasures "his free time to ride his bike, play ball and just hangout," says his mother Debby. 
But this summer "all his friends enrolled in camp, so there was no one for him to hang out with. 
He's got peer pressure to structure his time, too," -- or be isolated. 

   With fewer chances to choose their own activities with pals, children may be forgetting how to have fun. 
Without time to unwind, "they're nervous, scattered and anxious," says Mary Newman, head of the private Town School in Manhattan. 
"I understand parents who figure it's better to stick a kid in gymnastics class than let him spend the afternoon watching TV," she adds. 
"But what adult wants to spend 10 hours a day or more moving from one planned activity to the next?" 

   Children of young professionals also are accustomed to being entertained. 
By age two or three they're not only attending gymnastics classes and toddler swimming lessons but lavish birthday parties that feature professional clowns, jugglers and magicians. 
"For a simple, nothing party, you've got to figure $500 -- once you count food, favors and entertainment for 20 or 30 kids," says Ilanna Knapp, an executive at a New Jersey securities firm and mother of two children, ages five and nine. 
"You can't do less, because you don't want to see your kids ostracized." 

   But some kids are beginning to demand less structure -- and more freedom. 
Nine-year-old Kate Iger of Manhattan, for example, recently won permission to visit on her own a friend in an apartment building across the street. 
"My husband's frightened to death to let her out of our sight, but she's straining at the bit for more physical freedom," says her mother. 

   Similarly, Mrs. Knapp's nine-year-old daughter and her daughter's friends are requesting "quiet, much smaller birthday parties, with do-it-yourself craftsy things," she says. 
"They've been burned out by all the big groups and lavish entertainment, and they're saying 'Mommy, no more.'" 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
