ID: 264	RANK: 71	SCORE: 8.648076
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880107-0080 </DOCNO>
<HL> 'As Someone Famous Probably Once Said...' </HL>
<AUTHOR> Ken Calkins </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<TEXT>
   Political orators, preachers, advertisers, writers and anyone else who might use quotations of the famous in public, take notice: Every clumsy mistake of fact cancels five brillant denouements; every wrongfully claimed witticism negates five original and entertaining anecdotes. 

   Sen. Strom Thurmond, during the Bork hearings, felt compelled to quote an unnamed "great American statesman" as once saying, "I may disapprove of what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it." 
Oops. 
It was not the quote of an American, or a statesman, or anyone famous. 
The source is a little-known writer named E. Beatrice Hall, who (writing under the pen name S.G. Tallentyre) used the sentence in her book "The Friends of Voltaire" as a way of describing the attitude (but not the words) of Voltaire. 
Sen. Thurmond should have introduced the quote with, "As an obscure biographer once said about a Frenchman . . ." 

   A speaker or writer should never trust his memory to give him an accurate quote or attribution. 
For example, Delta Airlines has a radio commercial that begins, "Mark Twain said 'Everybody talks about the weather but nobody does anything about it.'" 
Delta perpetuated the most infamous misquotation in the annals of addled attribution. 
It was actually Charles Dudley Warner, a friend of Mark Twain and editor of the Hartford Courant, who made the statement. 

   Warner also was co-author (with Mark Twain) of a famous book entitled "The Gilded Age," a label later affixed to a whole generation. 
And he wrote other memorable lines for which almost nobody credits him. 
For example: "True it is that politics make strange bedfellows." 

   What if research cannot turn up a famous quotation in a standard reference, such as Bartlett's Familiar Quotations? 
What should the careful quotation user do? 
Proceed with extreme caution, for "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty." 
Now who do you suppose said that? 
Are you ready? 
No one famous ever said it, and that's too bad, because it's such a stirring quotation. 
It's often credited to Thomas Jefferson, but he left no record of having said it, and for that we can be thankful: Self-proclaimed patriots of many lands have used the quotation as justification for suspension of civil liberties. 

   As in two of the above examples, good writers composing words about a famous person can later find their words attributed to that famous person rather than to themselves. 
Leo Durocher, baseball manager of the 1940s and '50s, supposedly said, "Nice guys finish last." 
Durocher got tired of denying he ever said it. 
Actually, sportswriter Jimmy Cannon wrote the phrase in a story discussing Durocher's philosophy. 

   Another sports great, Vince Lombardi, became coach of the Green Bay Packers in 1959. 
I can remember on several occasions a quotation being attributed to him: "Winning is not everything; it's the only thing." 
Imagine my surprise when I was watching "Trouble Along the Way," a 1953 John Wayne movie about college football that played on television recently. 
In the movie, Wayne is a tough coach. 
One of his colleagues quotes the Wayne character as saying, "Winning isn't everything; it's the only thing." 
Were John Wayne and Vince Lombardi the same person? 

   W.C. Fields also has been misquoted. 
He supposedly said, "Any man who hates dogs and children can't be all bad." 
Sounds like Fields. 
That's what writer Leo Rosten thought when he wrote it about Fields in an article some years ago. 
He did not say Fields said it. 
He said Fields believed it. 

   Quotations by famous men and women are too often used to justify points of view that might never have been held by the person being quoted. 
For example, many prep-school athletic directors have thrilled to the words attributed to the Duke of Wellington: "The battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton." 
What the duke actually said was, "It is here that the battle of Waterloo was won." 
The "here" he was speaking of was the Eton classroom in which he was standing at the time he said it. 

   Such examples prove that the origin of any quote should be regarded with suspicion until it is proven. 
Cautious writers and speakers may, therefore, wish to take the advice of George Bernard Shaw: "I often quote myself; it adds spice to my conversation." 

   ---
   Mr. Calkins is a writer living in Seattle. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
