ID: 264	RANK: 84	SCORE: 8.100042
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861212-0150 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
The Exuberant Memoirs of a Dying Poet
---
By Richard Locke</HL>
<DD> 12/12/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Paul Zweig had a low, theatrical voice, and sometimes sounded as if he were sitting in a tough cafe in Paris, or -- a fainter echo -- in a bar out in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, where he'd lived as a boy. 
He was a big talker, a poet, and his dark eyes would flash as he grinned and spun phrases -- a New York intellectual in a Saul Bellow novel, but with a French literary twist. 
He'd spent his 20s in France during the Algerian war; he still spent summers in a stone farmhouse in the Dordogne. 

   Zweig worked hard and wrote quickly. 
I first knew him as a book reviewer who could turn out a dramatic and rather fancy literary piece in a few days. 
By his mid-30s he'd published two volumes of poetry and two books of cultural history- "The Heresy of Self-Love," on narcissism through the ages, centering on Rousseau; and "The Adventurer: The Fate of Adventure in the Western World" from Odysseus to Robinson Crusoe, Nietzsche, and Malraux. 

   Mercurial and self-dramatizing, he was never the conventional academic, though he ran the comparative literature department at Queens College. 
He traveled a lot and took risks. 
In his memoir "Three Journeys" he described his trip alone into the Sahara, his 10 years as a French communist, his sudden conversion to Hindu mysticism in a Manhattan ashram. 

   And then everything began to change. 
In 1978 he learned he had lymphatic cancer; his marriage fell apart; he plunged into a complex biographical and critical study of Walt Whitman; and his writing got larger and deeper and finer. 
His friendships deepened, too: He paid more attention to other people and developed a kind of plain, intimate speech full of feeling, a new emotional intelligence. 
He spoke about his illness with precision (radiation, chemotherapy, monoclonal antibodies) and not a shred of self-pity or dramatization: He was terrified, but he kept working. 

   His book on Whitman ("Walt Whitman: The Making of the Poet") came out two years ago and won the kind of universal praise a writer dreams of. 
He went off to France that summer with a sheaf of poems and the manuscript of a new, revised autobiography, seeming strong and happy. 
After chemotherapy in Paris, he went down to his farm to keep writing. 
In August 1984 he ran a high fever, took a train back to Paris and collapsed in a friend's arms in the station. 
He died a few days later. 

   "Departures" is the manuscript Paul Zweig was working on when he died at 49. 
It comes with a biographical and critical introduction by his friend and colleague Morris Dickstein. 
It is uncommonly intense and vividly written, and since it deals for the most part with his life as a young man in Paris in the late '50s and '60s, it has something of the drama of a young poet's self-discovery in a foreign land. 
The descriptions of Parisian street life, of Provence and the Alps, of Venice and the Tuscan coast seen from a motorcycle or a dusty blue Simca, are some of the best travel writing of recent years. 

   But these memoirs don't read like literary exercises. 
Instead of glamorizing a young poet's narcissistic exile, they tell a tale of bitterly comic psychoanalytic insight that, in its particularity, goes beyond the usual myths. 
Zweig's text is full of sex and politics. 
Unhappy, desperately frequent or impotent sex; sentimental, flagrantly radical politics that serve personal needs far more than social visions. 
Everything is suffused with the imagination of disaster. 
For young Zweig, it seems, sex and death and politics really were all mixed up together. 

   What is remarkable and original about "Departures" is the intensity of Zweig's physical experience of Paris and the sexual and political drama this Brooklyn boy plunged into. 
Zweig's account of learning to speak, read, eat, walk, gesture, think, and finally -- in a desperate act of cannibalism, he calls it -- to devour all of French literature and thus become French are filled with the angry energy of a boy on the run from home, an urban Huck Finn whose frontier turns out to be a communist neighborhood in Paris, whose companions and antagonists are three violently sexual women, and whose task is the liberation of his febrile American poet's soul. 

   Sex becomes grand guignol; politics becomes melodrama (police clubbing demonstrators, Zweig harboring an Algerian operative). 
The fear of death -- of self-dissolution -- drives him on, back to America. 

   And it is in America, in New York, that the final struggle begins, 12 years later. 
In the last section of the book, Zweig, now a man, not a boy, now married, a father, an accomplished, prolific literary figure, describes his experience of illness: His doctor's fingers probing the base of his neck; the deep pain of a bone marrow biopsy; the radiation treatments that dry up his salivary glands, stop his beard, and scorch his cheek and shoulder; the cool flutter of a chemotherapy injection and the fragile day of nausea that follows it; the hours spent playing in a sandbox with his daughter; seizing the day. 

   Perched in an apartment high above the Hudson, Zweig wrote as if his life depended on it. 
"Departures" vibrates with his belief that it did. 
And it gives us his voice again. 

   ---
   Mr. Locke teaches English at Columbia University. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
