ID: 264	RANK: 95	SCORE: 7.689480
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870203-0077 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Presidential Platitudes
---
By Richard John Neuhaus</HL>
<DD> 02/03/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   New reasons for despising Ronald Reagan are hard to come by. 
In "Reagan's America: Innocents at Home" (Doubleday, 472 pages, $19.95), Garry Wills, Northwestern University's celebrated cultural historian and student of presidents, works hard to pump new life into the old reasons that a minority of Americans has found convincing from the start of Mr. Reagan's political career. 
As a writer with a taste for style, Mr. Wills tries to avoid the anti-Reagan cliches, but repeatedly falls back into the bromides about Reagan the Hollywood illusionist who persuaded the gullible that he was restoring an America that never was, turned politics into Disneyland fantasy, drove the country into the future with his eyes fixed on the rear-view mirror, and so forth. 
Such partisan commonplaces are not the stuff to hold a reader's attention for almost 500 pages, and Mr. Wills seems to know that. 

   Perhaps that is why he hedges on the focus of the book. 
On the one hand, he says it is not a book about Mr. Reagan; it is about "Reagan's America." 
On the other hand, Mr. Reagan is the prism through which America is refracted. 
At some points we are told that Mr. Reagan has lived in only small slices of America, in "a cocoon of his own making," and is wildly out of touch with the real thing. 
But then we are assured that in Mr. Reagan we have the exact personalization of the mess America has become. 
In short, Mr. Wills does not find it easy to get his argument together. 
Mr. Reagan, he writes, is "the great American synecdoche." 
Synecdoche is the Greek for "sampling," and, says Mr. Wills, "we all take different samples from the rich store of associations that have accumulated around the Reagan career and persona. 
He is just as simple, and just as mysterious, as our collective dreams and memories." 
The usual meaning of synecdoche is that it is a figure of speech in which a part stands for the whole, the individual for the nation. 
However defined, the idea of synecdoche gives Mr. Wills license to wrap an anti-Reagan tract in several hundred pages of free associating about things American. 

   Because Mr. Wills is a well-read and frequently witty writer, his digressions on this, that and the other thing are often both informative and entertaining. 
Much can be learned here about the dark side of Mark Twain and Huck Finn's world, about the government's role in the opening of the West, about what FDR did and did not intend with the New Deal, about the rise of broadcast journalism, and about small-town religion in the first part of the century. 
At the beginning and end of each excursus there is reference to Mr. Reagan, as though to remind reader and author alike that this is, after all, a book about Mr. Reagan's America. 
Specific Reagan references typically remind Mr. Wills of something else he wanted to talk about. 
For instance, Nancy Reagan's wide-set, innocent eyes set the author off on a discussion of Hollywood's famous eyes. 
And Mr. Wills has an awful lot to say about movies. 
He seems unable to make up his mind whether Mr. Reagan's connection with the magic screen contributes to his phoniness or to his authenticity. 
Maybe he is most authentic when he is most phony, or maybe it's the other way around. 
It is the kind of quandary one gets into when writing about the "collective dreams and memories" associated, however vaguely, with the "persona" of Mr. Reagan. 

   To be sure, there are entire chapters given to the actual person and career of Ronald Reagan. 
Mr. Wills makes no claim to offering new information, since he admittedly has none. 
In fact, he routinely employs big chunks of previously published memoirs and biographical materials. 
The somewhat new thing is a lively indulgence of speculation that turns Mr. Reagan's dubious connections into criminal collusions and his financial good fortune into sure proof of corruption. 
Mr. Wills obviously enjoys thinking the worst of Mr. Reagan. 
And yet he grudgingly admires the man. 
Mr. Reagan, we are told, has so perfected "the fabulator's art" that he really doesn't know when he is lying. 
He is able to "will his own innocence" and to convince others of it. 
For instance, the author says that at one point in his life Mr. Reagan really believed that he had never been divorced, when in fact he had been, and that he still thinks he was in Europe during World War II, when in fact he was not. 
If Mr. Wills is right, Mr. Reagan is a very sick man and the 25th Amendment should be brought into play without delay. 

   But that is not the point that Mr. Wills, who describes himself as a conservative, wants to make. 
His point is that the upbeat fabulations of the Reagan era only hide from Americans the terrible things they have done to themselves. 
More precisely, Mr. Reagan's illusions disguise the greedy, grasping, wasting ways of a capitalism that destroys memory, tradition and community. 
Especially in his courting of the religious right, Mr. Reagan presents himself as a conservative while working hand in hand with the capitalist technicians and market manipulators who are the enemies of true conservatism. 
In the cultural contest between St. Augustine and Norman Vincent Peale, Mr. Reagan is solidly and mindlessly in the latter camp. 
As Mr. Wills makes clear, in comparison with Mr. Reagan, Jimmy Carter begins to look good. 
The point is not uninteresting, but it is neither persuasively argued nor enough to warrant such a massive effusion of cultural dyspepsia as "Reagan's America." 

   ---
   Mr. Neuhaus is director of the Rockford Institute Center on Religion and Society in New York. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
