ID: 146	RANK: 19	SCORE: 9.918796
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880211-0095 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Architecture: A Postmodern Park Replaces Seedy Abattoirs </HL>
<AUTHOR> Ellen Posner </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> Paris  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Of all the monumental architectural projects instigated by Francois Mitterrand's Socialist government since 1981 -- the museumization of the Orsay railway station, the new opera house at the Place de la Bastille, I.M. Pei's glass pyramid entrance to the Louvre -- the sun is shining brightest on the most ambitious and strangest of them all. 
At the forlorn eastern edge of the city, formerly a center for slaughterhouses and prostitution, the 75-acre Parc de la Villette is under way. 

   Ideas for injecting some new life into the greater 125-acre site on which the park is now emerging (and into the surrounding neighborhood as well) have been percolating since the 1970s. 
And there was sufficient interest in devoting some of the space to a mix of activities having something to do with science, technology and culture that Adrien Fainsilber's adaptation of one of the slaughterhouses into an exhibition center that is now known as the City of Science was launched. 

   It was in 1982, though, that a concept for developing the whole site crystallized and an international competition was held for the design of the park that would serve as its heart. 
In 1983, that commission was awarded to Bernard Tschumi, a 39-year-old Swiss-French architect who then was based in New York (and continues to be, since he has just been named dean of the Graduate School of Architecture Preservation and Planning at Columbia). 

   Mr. Tschumi had been teaching, writing and exhibiting his work in New York, Paris and London and had established a reputation as a theorist. 
But he had built virtually nothing. 
Even his admirers wondered if his complexly beautiful, edgy, abstract drawings (which showed three unrelated, superimposed systems: jigsawlike patches of ground; sinuous paths intersecting abrupt curved and straight axes; and a grid of tiny, brilliantly red cubes that were meant to be the park's "follies") could successfully be translated into a three-dimensional environment. 

   Mr. Tschumi has been able to turn his design into reality. 
And, as chief architect of the Parc de la Villette, he also has managed to steer the whole project (which also involves other architects, landscape architects and artists) through a bureaucracy that is at least as bizarre as any other and to bring it halfway to completion. 

   Things are moving along so well, in fact, that this fall, Mr. Mitterrand himself showed up to inaugurate the park with a formal ceremony and an elaborate display of Chinese fireworks. 
And in December, the French government awarded Mr. Tschumi its highest honor: the Medal of the Legion of Honor. 

   Nine follies are now in place in the landscape of la Villette and, as was intended, they establish a rhythm and a spirit for what now exists of the park. 
With obvious debts to Le Corbusier and even more to the Russian constructivists, their forms also have evolved from the architect's private lexicon, which is rooted in such contemporary sources as cinema technique and the literary theory of deconstruction. 

   Made of steel or concrete frames, the little buildings are sheathed in meticulously finished, red, porcelain-enameled steel panels, with some brushed aluminum and painted steel here and there. 
And while each structure clearly was derived from a cubic rectangle, each also appears to have been stripped, exploded, interrupted, skewed or added on to in a way that makes it distinctive and yet related to the others. 

   Movement and exploration are encouraged by the looped and winding ramps and stairs as well as the openings and enclosures. 
One folly serves as a belvedere, others house restaurants, a cafe bookstore, a gallery, a theater and visual arts workshops for children and adolescents. 

   The follies are set against very green, very manicured grass, brushed aluminum catwalks and bridges, pale blue terrazzo paving stones and benches, the latter embedded with tiny lights. 
Along one east-west axis a raised and covered walkway bites into each of the follies in its path at the second level as it heads toward another north-south walkway that is covered by an undulating blue metal canopy (these structures have been brought along to their present incarnation with the help of the fabulous Peter Rice, a London-based engineer). 
The theatrical effect is marred only by the depressing backdrop of slab highrises in the distance. 

   La Villette is, as its sounds, only very loosely a "park." 
It is "a place of activities rather than of repose," and it is a continuation, to some degree, of the urban fabric rather than an interruption. 
From the start, it was meant to reestablish in its own way that disappearing urban phenomenon: the gathering place. 
How this will work out still isn't clear. 
Many of the activities are geared to the young and a group already has been formed to keep an eye out for unruly teen-agers and to prevent the kind of scene that infests the space around the Beaubourg museum complex in central Paris. 

   Some elements were beyond the chief architect's control. 
When he began to build, Mr. Tschumi had to work around the City of Science, the round metallic "Geode" that stands in front of it (within which films are projected at nearly 360 degrees) and a fabric-covered rock concert hall (the Zenith) that was put up as a temporary structure in about 1983 and has been so successful that it will be maintained permanently. 

   There also were some surprisingly good buildings left over from the site's earlier purposes, and they have been restored. 
And on the horizon is the new two-part City of Music that will be designed by the young French architect Christian de Portzamparc and that will flank the entrance to the park. 

   Mr. Tschumi explains, though, that his design was meant to be inclusive and to accommodate oddities, interruptions and accidents as well as disparate work. 
Besides which, he is orchestrating a series of gardens and projects that will be threaded in a winding pattern through the park. 
So far a sunken bamboo garden and a walk-through "sound cylinder" with little waterfalls are already in place. 

   Meanwhile, various collaborations between luminaries of the cerebral avant-garde also are moving ahead. 
Peter Eisenman has been working with philosopher Jacques Derrida on a "garden" of Cor-ten steel, onyx and sand that can be entered from underneath and that is scheduled for completion this spring. 
John Hejduk is working with poet David Shapiro on a series of haunting sentrylike metal constructions and a spiky metal fountain. 
Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen also are on the list of participants, as is the much-hyped Philippe Starck, who is designing the chairs and lampposts. 

   It will be interesting to see how many of these statements la Villette can accommodate without turning into an architectural theme park (and what's wrong with a little repose, anyway?). 
But nearly all of the parts of the la Villette complex are risky and interesting endeavors that have been undertaken by persons who are excited about what they are doing -- which feels like a breath of fresh air. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
