ID: 146	RANK: 21	SCORE: 9.870874
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861210-0074 </DOCNO>
<HL> REAL ESTATE:
Different Approach Winning
Acceptance in Urban Projects
---
By Robert Guenther
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/10/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DOCKS GE
REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)
CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN>
<TEXT>
   NEW YORK ARCHITECT Alexander Cooper is something of a heretic. 
He thinks, for instance, that building design is of secondary importance to how the public spaces in a city are arranged. 
He believes in "background" buildings, structures that aren't show-stoppers but nevertheless enhance a neighborhood's ambiance. 
He accepts the automobile in the city and relies on streets to create life and visual order. 

   The views of the 50-year-old former director of Columbia University's urban-design program run counter to current practice. 
For many builders, public spaces are afterthoughts needed only to build larger towers, and they prefer high-rent "signature" buildings that clamor for attention. 

   Though Mr. Cooper's ideas go against popular practice, they are making headway. 
For example, Mr. Cooper and his former partner Stanton Eckstut are the designers of the streets and open space for Battery Park City, a 92-acre, mixed-use development in lower Manhattan. 
New York magazine called the plan "urbanity at its best." 
Urban critic William Whyte says Mr. Cooper's work is "outstanding." 

   WITH SUCH PRAISE, Mr. Cooper is bound to influence cities, builders, planners and architects. 
His newest project is another Manhattan job -- Donald Trump's 62-acre Television City. 
But the next of his projects to rise will be Cityfront Center in Chicago, 60 acres of largely vacant industrial land owned by Equitable Life Assurance Society and Chicago Dock &amp; Canal Trust Co. 
The city last year approved the plan, which envisions about 22 million square feet of new offices, apartments and hotels being built over the next 20 years or so. 
Ground was recently broken for the project's first building, regional offices for National Broadcasting Co., which is being developed by Tishman Speyer Properties. 

   Cityfront Center will feature broad tree-lined streets and a pedestrian esplanade along a stretch of the Chicago River. 
High-rise offices on the western end of the site and apartments and townhouses on the eastern side will be clustered around five large public spaces. 
"It's the public spaces that define the plan," Mr. Cooper says. 
Oddly enough, the allocation of Cityfront Center's land -- about half for buildings, a third for public open spaces and rest for steets -- is comparable to that for Battery Park City and Television City. 
"My reaction to that is either we only know how to do things one way or there's a certain internal logic to this," says Mr. Cooper. 

   The plans for Cityfront Center are based on Mr. Cooper's credo for urban design: Keep it simple. 
Although Cityfront Center is well-located, stretching from North Michigan Avenue east to Lakeshore Drive along the north bank of the Chicago River, it posed some formidable design problems. 

   THE FOREMOST CHALLENGES were the 35-foot drop in the site's elevations and the fact that access from Michigan Ave. -- the most desirable approach -- is blocked by a public plaza and the existing Equitable Building. 
Mr. Cooper rejected the usual solutions, such as multiple levels running throughout the project ("I don't like them."). 
His plan puts all of the commercial buildings level with Michigan Avenue and the residential portion at ground level on the eastern end of the site. 
Escalators and stairways will connect the two. 
As for a project entrance, Mr. Cooper put the ceremonial access off Illinois Street. 
By creating a drive and public space similar to the Channel Gardens at New York's Rockefeller Center and redesigning the existing plaza, Mr. Cooper hopes to let passers-by on Michigan Avenue know that there is something worth seeing behind the Equitable Building. 

   Mr. Cooper's ideas required a bit of salesmanship. 
For instance, Chicago city officials assumed that Cityfront Center's streets would be multilevel like Lakeshore Drive, but Mr. Cooper wanted no part of that. 
"Lakeshore Drive is 25 feet up in the air," he says. 
"Since this side of the project is residential, I didn't want a raised street running through the project between residences and the water. 
You can't plant trees underneath it, and I don't want three levels of parking underneath townhouses." 

   CHICAGO DOCK balked at first at Mr. Cooper's idea of running a street alongside the river esplanade; it wanted the apartment buildings next to the esplanade. 
Mr. Cooper explains: "I don't like private property abutting a park. 
Besides, you'd have the backs of the buildings instead of the entrances overlooking the river, and without a street you could have security problems. . . . 
The site had no acceptance in the marketplace. 
That's what streets bring to it." 

   But perhaps the most innovative aspect of the city-approved plan is its flexibility. 
While it limits development for the entire project and sets public space requirements, the plan allows the developers to concentrate public space in five locations instead of apportioning it on a lot-by-lot basis. 
"We broke the site up into small parcels so it won't seem like a project," Mr. Cooper says. 
"But the city let us aggregate the open space, so we won't get 40 or 50 'postage stamps' for open space." 
He adds: "We approached all three of our big projects from the same point of view. 
They're all organized around public spaces and are driven by quality design." 

   For all his achievement as an urban designer, however, Mr. Cooper has yet to design a building in the three big projects he has planned. 
Sensing the irony in this, he grins and says he wants to change that. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
