ID: 146	RANK: 32	SCORE: 9.384998
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880726-0156 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Architecture: The Prince Had a Point </HL>
<AUTHOR> John Marcom Jr. </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> London  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Future scholars may date the nadir of British architecture to May 30, 1984. 
That's when Prince Charles raised a furor by pillorying a design for a National Gallery annex. 
Starved for patronage, the trustees wanted to build an office building overlooking Trafalgar Square. 
His highness called it a "monstrous carbuncle." 

   The trustees trembled, and the Sainsbury family anted up for a nicer building without the crass protrusion. 
Philadelphia architects Venturi, Rauch &amp; Scott Brown designed a much more sensitive addition, politely mindful of regal neighbors and royal tastes. 

   Critics and architects quibble with the prince -- lots -- for being overly reactionary. 
But give him this much: London's carbuncle quotient is plummeting. 
Leading architects have taken to heart all those fashionable theories about urban contexts and classical elements and put them to work in an extraordinary flurry of new construction here. 
The results mightn't live up to the glorious past, but far surpass the rude concrete junk of recent decades. 
The new breed of buildings here has manners, deferring to the surroundings like wealthy matrons at a Buckingham Palace garden party. 

   Not all the attempts succeed, but then not all the matrons dress so well. 
Philip Johnson, ever the troublemaker, last year proposed a grand-scale faux pas, a Kuwaiti-backed office complex that looked just like the Houses of Parliament -- only much larger, and sheathed in mirrored glass. 
The dedicated tourist will find dozens of other architectural malaprops around town with overly intricate exterior detail, eccentric cornice lines and pretentiously formal entrances. 

   The grand-scale projects, on the whole, are utterly correct. 
Any tour has to start with Broadgate, a sprawling redevelopment of some ugly old British Rail yards around Liverpool Street station, on the "fringe" of the City of London. 

   Broadgate is a series of 13 buildings, each square and solid and intended as the home of a square and solid bank. 
The buildings present interesting facades to the street, and make pleasing, nicely scaled public spaces outside while giving their occupants big open trading floors inside. 
The first phases -- the work of a British firm called Arup Associates -- go in heavily for atria with some Babylonesque upper-level gardens. 
There's a plaza with an ice rink, a homage to Rockefeller Center that, after the stock-market crash, seems an extravagance. 

   The later phases are the work of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill (SOM), which has embraced the neoclassical mode so popular among developers the world over. 
A huge building going up on the east side of the station has arches, grand stairways and granite facing, evoking the Victorian insurance and shipping houses elsewhere in town. 

   These buildings dress up a dreary patch of city, but still fit in. 
The impact of Canary Wharf, the world's largest and most ballyhooed commercial development, is harder to gauge. 
In London's once-derelict Docklands, a few miles downriver, it has nothing much to fit into. 
The project's creator, New York developer G. Ware Travelstead, had a futuristic vision of asymmetrical towers and a massive substructure of roads and parking-garage space. 

   Last year he was elbowed aside by Olympia &amp; York, owned by the Reichmann brothers from Canada, who are now completing New York's World Financial Center. 
As reshaped by the Reichmanns, Canary Wharf is twice the size of the WFC, but similarly respectful to architectural history in spirit. 
SOM went back to the drawing board and came up with a more formal parade of fashionably postmodern towers along a central parkway. 
The Canadians hired Sir Roy Strong, former director of the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum, to be their "open-space adviser." 
Sir Roy gushes about the parks, shrubs and trees. 
There will be railings, lampposts and park benches built just as they used to be, he says. 

   Lampposts can't hide the fact that Canary Wharf is going to be one crowded dock, chockablock with hulking if tasteful edifices from such noted U.S. firms as Kohn, Pederson, Fox and SOM. Cesar Pelli designed the centerpiece, a skyscraper that will be the tallest in Britain. 
Mr. Pelli says the obelisk doesn't look like anything in particular. 
In fact, it looks an awful lot like one of the towers at the WFC, another Pelli creation. 
But that's probably fine, because the outsize scale of this will be more like Manhattan than ye olde London. 

   Canary Wharf won't pierce the horizon for a year or two yet, keeping attention focused on projects upriver. 
Preservationists and developers just had it out -- again -- in a five-week hearing about No. 1 Poultry, a small triangle in the City right at the historical heart of global finance. 
Owner Peter Palumbo originally proposed a Mies van der Rohe office block, all sleek and rectangular and now almost laughably out of fashion. 
Prince Charles called it a "glass stump." 
That plan bit the dust in 1985. 

   Its replacement is the right shape and the right size, and in the right stone materials. 
It's by one of the right architects, much-praised museum wizard and native son James Stirling. 
But it's startling all the same, with a medley of circular and triangular elements and big portals straight out of an Egyptian temple. 
At the triangle's apex -- staring straight down the street at illustrious neighbors such as the Bank of England -- Mr. Stirling placed a turret, with little gangplanks on either side. 
The government is expected to rule yea or nay by fall. 

   Still ahead is what could be the archidrama of the decade, hearings over a replacement for Paternoster Square, a dreadful 1960s complex just to the north of St. Paul's Cathedral. 
Gray, bleak and Stalinist, it encapsulates the evils of insensitive modern architecture. 
The developers chose Arup Associates to design a Broadgatelike complex, with a long arc of a shopping mall, a new piazza and a landscaped buffer between the complex and the great church. 

   Alas for Arup, Prince Charles already has made his displeasure known. 
He stood up a few months ago at a Royal Institute of British Architects dinner to bite the hands that had just fed him. 
"This is very much the age of the computer and the word processor," he said, "but why on earth do we have to be surrounded by buildings that look like such machines?" 

   The hearings promise to be spirited. 
The London Evening Standard, an evening tabloid, took up the royal battle cry. 
It is backing a resolutely classical design by John Simpson &amp; Partners, which would put modern offices and shops behind old-fashioned facades and restore ancient street patterns. 

   The plan, like Prince Charles's laments, is a shade too wistful. 
This is a thriving city in the late 20th century, not Disneyland and not Williamsburg. 
If London were rebuilt to 18th-century scale, where would all the Londoners live and work? 

   ---
   Mr. Marcom is a reporter in the Journal's London bureau. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
