ID: 146	RANK: 34	SCORE: 9.364709

<DOC>
<DOCNO> SJMN91-06105170 </DOCNO>
<ACCESS> 06105170 </ACCESS>
<CAPTION>  Photos (9); PHOTO: Architect's drawing of St. James Park plan in the '20s,
with its paths, plants, rose beds and the Victorian fountain in the center.
(color); PHOTO: Santa Clara County Courthouse, built to lure the state capital
to San Jose, when it still had its dome; PHOTO: Trinity Episcopal Cathedral;
PHOTO: San Jose Post Office; PHOTO: Santa Clara County Courthouse; PHOTO:
Former First Church of Christ, Scientist; PHOTO: St. Claire Club; PHOTO: San
Jose Athletic Club; PHOTO: First Unitarian Church  </CAPTION>
<DESCRIPT>  SAN-JOSE; CITY; BUILDING; HISTORY; PAST  </DESCRIPT>
<LEADPARA>  ONE city document describes the park and the grand old buildings surrounding
it as "the most vital urban remnants of 19th century San Jose.";    Another
calls the park the city's "one significant piece of greenery and dominant
urban open space."  </LEADPARA>
<SECTION>  Living  </SECTION>
<HEADLINE>  SQUARE ROOTS
PRESERVATIONISTS ARE PUSHING HARD TO KEEP WHAT THEY CONSIDER AN INTEGRAL PART
OF CITY HISTORY FROM BECOMING PART OF ITS PAST  </HEADLINE>
<MEMO>  Cover Story;  SETTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT (publ. 4/19/91, pg. 2F);  Because of
a reporter's errors, stories about St. James Square in the April 14 Living
section incorrectly reported several details. The names of Dr. Mark Rifenbark
and the Sainte Claire Club were misspelled. Fred Richards is no longer a
member of the vestry at Trinity Episcopal Cathedral. The First Unitarian
Church has 220 members. Because of an editor's error, the former home of the
Eagles Order was incorrect. The correct name is Eagles Hall.  </MEMO>
<TEXT>     Yet if your San Jose tour guide offered you no further clues, you would be
hard pressed to find this aging central patch of urban greenery, this common
ground.;    It's St. James Square, the city center including the 7 1/2- acre
St. James Park, containing grass, trees, benches and even a renovated
fountain. The square is encompassed by East St. James, St. John, North First
and Third streets.;    In the 1800s, when San Jose was a centrally populated
city of 25,000, St. James Park was the place to gather -- for speeches,
parades or Sunday afternoon strolls.;    More recently, as the city lost its
commercial and residential core, the park has been neglected, forgotten, a
refuge for street people and little else.;    Within the last few years,
however, a preservationist movement has begun in San Jose. New voices are
demanding the city retain some of its architectural and cultural history, and
people have a vision for the St. James Square of the '90s.;    Most of the
historic buildings facing the park are still there and still in use: the San
Jose Athletic Club (a former Scottish Rite Temple), First Unitarian Church,
Trinity Episcopal Cathedral, U.S. Post Office, Santa Clara County Courthouse
(temporarily closed for earthquake repair) and the St. Claire Club.;    "It
represents one of the smallest historic districts in the country," says
downtown architect Craig Mineweaser. "We're really in danger of losing the
district as a designation if we lose one more building.";    And one
architectural treasure on the square is in grave danger. Architect Willis
Polk's 87-year-old First Church of Christ, Scientist sits empty and
deteriorating on valuable land the owners hope to turn into a parking lot.
Inspired by the Ionian temple of Ulysses, it's a simple but elegant building.
San Jose architect Jerome King has studied the building and calls its
Classical Revival design nearly perfect.;    King is working on a feasibility
study for the Preservation Action Council, a citizens' group hoping to save
the church. His report will propose future uses for the building, in the hope
of preventing it from becoming another St. James Square disaster.;    If ever
there was a city park with a haunted history, St. James is it.;    (box) In
1933, two thugs kidnapped and murdered department store heir Brooke Hart. They
were dragged from their jail cells by an angry mob and lynched there. The
trees from which their bodies swung are long gone, but the bitter memories
remain.;    (box) President William McKinley spoke there in 1901, six months
before he was assassinated. A statue was erected in his memory.;    (box)
Robert F. Kennedy spoke there in 1969, shortly before his assassination. A
podium in his honor stands there today.;    This is San Jose's answer to
Golden Gate Park, Central Park and Boston Common?;    "The square, I'm sure,
played a central part in the history of the times, but it has not been written
because it was taken for granted," says Mineweaser.;    "It really exemplified
the American city," says urban planner William Zavlaris.;    The park is a
stage;  In 1848 -- two years before California became a state and San Jose
became its first city -- Yale University surveyor Charles Lyman plotted St.
James Park as the town's central open space. The park's walkways were inspired
by Frederick Law Olmstead, the pioneer urban landscape designer. As the city
grew, religious, social and public buildings went up around it. "The park is
the stage and the surrounding buildings act as backdrop," says King.;    The
result? Something of an an architectural microcosm: Gothic, Greek, Spanish
Colonial and Romanesque revival, Neoclassical, Renaissance, and Mediterranean.
"The square sort of represents the various architects and the various movers
and shakers of their time," says Mineweaser.;    More recently, however, the
park has been a derelict space -- and worse. In 1955, Second Street was
extended, eliminating the central fountain and cutting the park in two. In
1968, a "temporary" pagoda-style community center was built in the park to
serve the elderly, and political pressure has kept it there. In 1983, the
graceful Eagles Hall -- built as a Masonic temple in 1900 -- was replaced by
the ugly, nine-story St. James Park office tower, which merely retains the
temple's portico as a kind of cut-and-paste false front.;    "St. James Square
never was the center of the city in the sense that Plaza Park was," says Jack
Douglas, head of Special Collections at San Jose State University and former
chairman of the Historic Landmarks Commission. "It's off-center so it never
was urban removed," Douglas says with obvious sarcasm.;    Eagles Hall has
been all but removed, however, a loss that moved the Historic Landmarks
Commission to adopt strict construction guidelines to control future uses of
this fragile historic district.;    Preservationists find recent public
efforts at historic renovation -- the Thomas Fallon House, county courthouse
and the park itself -- encouraging, however. The park is being refurbished,
with landscaping and a Victorian fountain designed to mirror the spirit of its
origins. Although most of the old elm trees were diseased and had to go, in
December the city -- and neighborhood residents -- planted new trees in the
park, a gesture intended to encourage people to begin thinking of this open
space as their own.;    And the Preservation Action Council will soon release
King's feasibility study proposing potential future uses for the First Church
of Christ, Scientist.;    Classic challenge;  "It's a classic renovation
challenge in terms of a city trying to keep an historic landmark with land
values where they are," says King. His report will show that -- "though
creative adaptive re-use" -- historic buildings can be "opportunities, not
liabilities.";    Partially funded by the National Trust for Historic
Preservation, the study will stress the building's architectural significance
as well as the historical importance of Polk -- a quirky, flamboyant character
who has emerged as one of the leading turn-of-the-century Northern California
architects.;    It will offer many potential uses for the building -- a
community center, museum, art gallery, performing arts center, even a church
-- but no specific recommendations.;    Nonetheless, the report's clear
preference reportedly will be the use of the building as the central focus of
a mixed-use, high density retail and residential complex.;    "Demolition is
not an option -- because there are so many others," says King.; EAGLES CLUB;  
 Graceful Eagles Hall was built as a Masonic temple in 1900. The Greek Revival
structure later became the home of the Eagles Order. In 1983, it was replaced
by the nine-story St. James Park office tower, which has kept its portico as
an entrance. Ninety percent of the original building is gone.; TRINITY
EPISCOPAL CATHEDRAL;    This remarkable old redwood church was built in 1863
and is the oldest permanent house of worship in San Jose.;    "Trinity Church
setting itself there established the fact that this was going to become the
city's center square," says urban planner William Zavlaris.;    A fine example
of carpenter Gothic architecture, Trinity follows the design of English
country churches. It originally faced St. James Park, but the parish grew in
the 1870s, so it was cut in half, enlarged and turned sideways facing Second
Street. The tower and spire were added in 1884. "When it was turned sideways,
it became the cruciform (cross-shaped) church that it is now," says Fred
Richards, church vestry member and a retired architect who did structural
repairs in the '50s.;    "The walls were 14 inches out of plumb. There was no
foundation under it," he recalls. "The joke at the time was that the good Lord
and Dr. (Mark) Rifendark (an early church rector) held the church together."; 
  Two years ago, more work was done on the church by Michael Lorimer, the
architect in charge of St. Joseph Cathedral's renovations, to improve its
lighting and acoustics and remove a screen that blocked worshipers' views of
the beautiful stained glass windows.;    Church historian Janice Paull says
Trinity's parish has included many San Jose notables -- including the city's
first mayor, Thomas Fallon. (We may have found the ideal location for that
statue.); U.S. POST OFFICE;    In 1933, San Jose's downtown post office moved
from one great old building to another -- from the 1892 Richardson Romanesque
structure facing Plaza Park (and now serving as the San Jose Museum of Art) to
the Spanish Colonial Revival building facing St. James Park.;    The new post
office was built on the site of the former St. James Hotel, downtown San
Jose's major hostelry from the 1890s, a structure that also had added stature
to the park. It was designed by Ralph Wykoff, a little known but obviously
capable San Jose architect, and built at a cost of $308,000 as a Works
Progress Administration (WPA) project under the administration of Franklin
Delano Roosevelt.;    The ornate lobby features marble floors, brass lighting
fixtures and carved, exposed-beam ceilings, and the twin projecting towers on
the north and south ends of the building's rectangular roof mirror the towers
of such other buildings on the square as the First Unitarian Church and St.
Claire Club.; SANTA CLARA COUNTY COURTHOUSE;    San Jose had been California's
first state capital, from 1849 through early 1851. In 1866, the city made a
bold, if fruitless, attempt to lure the state government back here. Esteemed
architect Levi Goodrich was hired to design a county courthouse so grandiose
that it might later serve as the new state capital.;    Although the scheme
failed, San Jose was left with one of the state's most impressive public
buildings -- and also one of the last remaining structures designed by
Goodrich in his home city. (He may have designed the Thomas Fallon house.);   
"This building really is St. James Square," says Bonnie Bamburg, the
renovation consultant coordinating the county's $16 million repair of the
building after it was damaged in the Loma Prieta quake. "Because of the size
and magnitude of this building, it is unquestionably the keystone of the
square.";    Bamburg also says the judges and lawyers are adamant about
getting the building back because it's both grand and functional.;    The
original Renaissance Revival courthouse had two stories and a central dome,
but it was damaged in the 1906 earthquake, gutted by fire in 1931 and rebuilt
with a new third floor and no dome.;    "The building is in large measure from
1931," says Bamburg, "with a lot of division for small offices primarily on
the north and south sides. Beyond that are the courtrooms. The grand space of
the lobby retains what the general public would see as historic."; ST. CLAIRE
CLUB;    Organized in 1888 as an elite men's business and social club, the St.
Claire celebrated its centennial in 1988. But it was a very quiet affair.;   
One of its early members was James Phelan, banker, U.S. senator and former San
Francisco mayor. "Phelan spent his winters in San Francisco, came down here
summers and wanted to have a social club," says urban planner William
Zavlaris. "It's still by far the most private, exclusive men's club in the
area.";    The building, of Mission Revival styling with unusual ornamental
brick detailing, was designed and built in 1893 by A. Page Brown, a leading
Northern California architect -- which tells us something about the
significance of the building in its day. "None of the other private clubs had
architecture of that high quality," Zavlaris says.;    Jack Douglas, head of
San Jose State University's Special Collections, says the club actually was
"the unofficial seat of power in the county.";    Inside, the dining room is
to the right of the central stairway and a large social hall is on the left.
The walls are adorned with California landscapes and the upstairs bar, lounge
and library have dark walnut paneling and overstuffed chairs. This is the
stodgy, private, rich man's club all of us non- members have seen again and
again in New Yorker cartoons.; THE SAN JOSE ATHLETIC CLUB;    This massive
three-story neo-classical structure, -- an example of Renaissance Revival with
Beaux Arts styling and Egyptian ornamentation, was built by the local Masonic
Order as its Scottish Rite Temple in 1924.;    Designed by Bay Area architect
Carl Werner, the building's portico features six Ionic columns, a grand
14-step entrance stairway and twin sphinxes projecting from the ground floor.
The auditorium features ornate wood beams and a marble floor.;    Now the home
of the Athletic Club, the building's facade has been restored and its
foundation structurally strengthened. "The Athletic Club saved the most
historic elements of the building -- the main entrance space and the
auditorium, which is now a restaurant by day and a ballroom at night," says
architect Jerome King. "It's the best place in town for a black tie.";    A
swimming pool has been added to the rear of the building, but it's
unobtrusive. "They just stuck it in there and it's ideal," says King.;    This
building and the county courthouse, which face one another across St. James
Park, are the two buildings of monumental scale on the square.; FIRST
UNITARIAN CHURCH;    This beautiful Romanesque Revival church was built by
local architect George Page to resemble a Unitarian church in Transylvania. He
broke ground in September 1891; the congregation is planning a yearlong
centennial bash beginning this fall.;    The odd design includes 70 Romanesque
arches, 48 stained glass windows, four domes and two towers that flank the
entrance. The sanctuary is something of a "church in the round" and the
acoustics created by its geodesic dome are so good that the San Jose Symphony
played here in its early days and the San Jose Chamber Music Society performs
here to sellout crowds.;    "The church was built by 100 people, the whole
size of the congregation then," says church historian Charlie Newman. "It has
dwindled down to as few as 40." The congregation has always been small but
influential. U.S. Rep. Don Edwards, D-San Jose, is a member and its early
members included A. T. Herrman, the civil engineer who built the road up Mt.
Hamilton; Dr. Benjamin Cory, San Jose's first physician, and J. E. Brown,
founder of the first free library.;    The Unitarians also have been on the
cutting edge of many social movements. The church was the site of San Jose's
first soup kitchen and gay church. It offered draft counseling during the
Vietnam War, and in 1965 the church's Host Project brought 40 black teen-agers
from Selma, Ala., to San Jose for the summer.; THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST,
SCIENTIST;    The last of the elegant structures to go up across from St.
James Park at the turn of the century, this Classical Revival church "should
be on the National Register of Historic Places by virtue of its architect
alone," according to San Jose architect Jerome King.;    Willis Polk came to
California from Missouri and quickly established himself as a leading
architect, egomaniac and Bohemian Club ne'er-do-well.;    In 1904, he built
this church with a floor plan in the shape of a Greek cross. He said he was
inspired by the Ionian temple of Ulysses, but he made design changes similar
to those of the 16th century Venetian designer Andrea Palladio.;    Polk, once
described by House and Garden magazine as "the enfant terrible of western
architecture," led a return to period design that swept through Northern
California. He also was responsible for many Mission Revival mansions in the
valley.;    The building is a wood-framed structure, not stone -- typical of
California construction, because wood was available and more resistant to
earthquake damage. A wooden structure also is more susceptible to
deterioration, but easily can be retrofitted and made safe.;    Four fluted
ionic columns dominate the facade. The interior is a simple, elegant, light
and airy space with the columns accentuating its height. Although the building
is not very large, Polk designed in a sense of grandeur. The church also has
been used as a midnight movie house, but has been empty and falling into
disrepair for years. It is currently owned by the St. Claire Corp.
partnership, which has been prevented from demolishing it by the building's
historic district designation.  </TEXT>
<BYLINE>  DAVE O'BRIAN, Mercury News Staff Writer  </BYLINE>
<COUNTRY>  USA  </COUNTRY>
<EDITION>  Morning Final  </EDITION>
<CODE>  SJ  </CODE>
<NAME>  San Jose Mercury News  </NAME>
<PUBDATE>   910414  </PUBDATE> 
<DAY>  Sunday  </DAY>
<MONTH>  April  </MONTH>
<PG.COL>  1L  </PG.COL>
<PUBYEAR>  1991  </PUBYEAR>
<REGION>  WEST  </REGION>
<FEATURE>  PHOTO  </FEATURE>
<STATE>  CA  </STATE>
<WORD.CT>  2,881  </WORD.CT>
<DATELINE>  Sunday, April 14, 1991
00105170,SJ1  </DATELINE>
<COPYRGHT>  Copyright 1991, San Jose Mercury News  </COPYRGHT>
<LIMLEN>  0  </LIMLEN>
<LANGUAGE>  ENG  </LANGUAGE>
</DOC>
