ID: 146	RANK: 40	SCORE: 9.135534
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880714-0098 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Architecture: Bringing the Stroller Set to Battery Park City </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Battery Park City's abnormally attractive mix of apartment buildings and office towers is about the closest this grungy, overbuilt city has come to an urban miracle. 
Just south of the World Trade Center's sleekly creepy twin towers, the complex rises on 92 acres of landfill, a breezy multibillion-dollar oasis ornamented with fruit trees and park benches on a riverside esplanade. 

   What's wrong with this pretty picture? 
What has New York State's Battery Park City Authority not managed to attract to its tree-lined terraces with harbor views of Miss Liberty, not to mention ambitiously supervised architecture and deep-dish tax abatements? 
Little people in diapers and strollers. 
That's what. 

   And, more's the pity, all the amenities are in place for the missing nippers: a cookie store, a clean, well-lit school, a supermarket, sandboxes. 
But families are few and toddlers under 12 are only 5% of Battery Park City's total population. 
The main reasons are cost and apartment size. 
The Battery Park Housing Authority left these two crucial matters to the discretion of individual developers, after setting a minimum of 400 square feet for the smallest residential units. 

   Behind the attractive facades, all sported up with ornamental grills, cornices and subtle brickwork, are mostly studios and small one-bedroom apartments designed for the model tenant all builders seem to have in mind these days: sterile investment bankers under 5-foot-2. 
Who else can fit comfortably into a $250,000 condo and not mind the price? 
Rentals are few, and only 61 of 2,207 new apartments are subsidized. (There also are some cheaper, very ugly flats designed during Battery Park's quixotic, financially blighted infancy, before the state took it over from New York City.) 

   Eventually, even the yuppies move out to breed in the 'burbs. 
And BPCA is worried this pattern of transiency will hurt its ambitions to foster a real community. 
So BPCA is studying design options for future family housing scheduled on three empty lots north of the new North Cove marina. 
Four firms of architects, chosen from 100, are working up new concepts in affordable family housing. 

   Each firm was awarded $50,000 to explore what could be done about increasing space without increasing and preferably reducing hard costs: about $100 per square foot. (That's any apartment in Manhattan. 
Cost difference between a luxury and budget apartment is suprisingly small, and comes from such cosmetic flourishes as marble bathrooms and parquet floors.) 

   Suppose you offer tenants the flexibility normally extended to offices? 
Max Bond of Bond Ryder James Architects argues architects should, because who are they to know just exactly who is moving in and what their needs might be? 
He thinks changing the design process might favorably change the economics. 

   In Mr. Bond's ideal housing, the architect leaves everything beyond permanent fixtures such as bathrooms to tenants, who design their interiors on a computer screen. 
Numbers are crunched out simultaneously, telling you, say, that the neat entertainment niche in malachite you have just doodled up is costing out at $5 billion. 
You may wish to wait a bit. 

   That's the appeal of the scheme: Not only do apartment prices run about 20% lower, but young couples could space out improvements as their financial situation blossoms. 
In Holland this combination of computer aids and loft-type spaces has proven very popular, though you do wonder whether this constant remodeling may be less manageable in a 12-story building in Battery Park City than in a two-story Dutch apartment house with fewer people hammering into the night or hogging the elevator with stacks of two-by-fours. 

   Rather than wait for future tenants to express themselves at a computer terminal, Joan Goody came down to Battery Park City from the Boston office of Goody, Clancy &amp; Associates Inc. to interview a few families already ensconced. 
What do you want? 
No dogs in the sandbox was followed by a longish wish list. 

   In response, the Goody Clancy proposal provides 100% more storage space and sunny eat-in kitchens big enough for highchair diners to practice throwing carrot goo a decent distance. 
Ms. Goody positioned many of the larger units around an interior courtyard so parents could keep an eye on little Manny. 
And tenants could carve out a small kid's room by subdividing the master bedroom and still have two windowed rooms that would meet building codes. 

   Ms. Goody also met the challenge of where to put a working mom's au pair. 
Getting babysitters is a problem, families told her. 
Ms. Goody conceived of "swing" rooms on every floor, inserted between two units. 
Either apartment has the option of connecting to this little studio and the Danish pastry within. 

   Other nice surprises lurk in the layouts proposed by The Ehrenkrantz Group &amp; Eckstut. 
Ezra Ehrenkrantz, the principal partner, points to a model showing a splitlevel, skip-stop building whose charm is such you wonder why the type isn't seen more often. 
With elevators stopping on every other floor, there's a 10% gain in livable space and layouts are enormously varied, ranging from studios to a variety of duplexes that can be subdivided and rented out. 

   Still, hard questions obtrude on these Edens. 
Will the New York construction trade embrace the Ehrenkrantz proposal's newfangled insulating and load-bearing Canadian Polysteel? 
High construction costs probably also will put the kibosh on the precast concrete giant neo-classical ornaments the Spanish-born architect, Ricardo Bofill, has used so awesomely in his new Paris apartment complex and wants to try here too. 

   To make any of this feasible for middle-income families earning $45,000 or less, mere ingenuity on the architects' part does not seem to have been enough to bring down the cost per apartment. 
So BPCA is exploring various types of subsidies to get the desirable social mix that used to happen naturally in this city before rent controls distorted the housing market. 
Very likely 30% of the apartments will be reserved for the moderate incomes, with wealthier tenants forking up market prices. 

   Does it make sense to build subsidized housing on land almost as expensive as the Tokyo Ginza? 
Logic would suggest otherwise, and New York City is doing what it can to make sure it doesn't happen. 
Right now, the city uses profits from Battery Park City to rehab rubbled sections of the Bronx. 
It would like to keep the faucet flowing full strength. 
So the city is opposing a bill introduced into the state legislature by the BPCA that would make cheap financing available to developers for the duration of construction. 

   So the outlook for babies without silver spoons in their mouths on the Battery Park City esplanade is not brilliant. 
Their best friend, BPCA Uhairman Meyer (Sandy) Frucher is resigning, seeking bigger bucks in the private sector to pay for the education of his own children. 
Maybe what we need is a children's crusade, hundreds of toddlers forming INPAC, Infant's Political Action Committee, with yowling phone squads that won't hang up until state reps agree to vote them a little pork and a chance to live within stroller range of Wall Street. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
