ID: 146	RANK: 65	SCORE: 8.490329
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870818-0122 </DOCNO>
<HL> Latest Driving Issue
To Divide Congress:
Capitol Parking Lot
---
Senate Backs Plan to Convert
It Into a Park, but House
Prefers Perk over Park
---
By Edward Sussman
Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/18/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   In Congress these days, the great issues of the moment are Central America, the Persian Gulf, the budget -- and the parking lot. 

   The lot in question is directly in front of the Capitol. 
For years, it has been among the most prized perks on parking-tight Capitol Hill. 
"Everybody wants the shortest walk possible, and they will practically knife one another to get it," says Pete O'Brien, the director of the Senate parking office. 
Every day, 350 of Washington's power elite -- legislators, key aides, journalists -- are allowed the privilege of parking only steps from the ornate dome. 

   But now the Senate and the House are in a messy fight over whether to replace the lot with a park. 
Favoring the park are the Senate leadership -- antsy about security since a bomb exploded outside its chambers four years ago -- and the architect of the Capitol, George White, who says, "A supermarket parking lot is an indignity to the Capitol." 

   But the House leadership -- especially Speaker James Wright -- sees little threat from the lot and even less reason to spend the money on Mr. White's vision of elegant fountains and a pink and gray granite walkway. 
The speaker, says an aide, has never objected to the parking lot and still doesn't. 
As for the Senate, "they can do whatever they want with their side." 

   To which J.O. Ratliff, the chief of staff to Senate GOP Whip Alan Simpson, replies that anyone who would put parking above security is "pathetically selfish." 
Democratic Whip Alan Cranston said in testimony before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee last May: "All parking should be removed from the Capitol plaza; there should be no exceptions." 

   Park boosters note that the park plans would permit construction of a barrier around the Capitol, allowing screening of visitors before they approach the building. 

   But the House shows no sign of budging. 
Aides say the speaker has ruled out any major parking changes until at least January 1989, citing more important topics on the national agenda. 
"This is not one of the better times to be spending money," says Wilson Morris, an aide to Speaker Wright. 
"I'm more worried about the budget right now than parking spaces." 

   "A cold day in hell is what I think they're looking for," suggests Robert Petersen, the superintendent of the Senate press gallery. 

   This isn't the first time the Capitol has proved too small to accommodate the clash of institutional egos. 
Back in 1962, for instance, two elderly patriarchs of Congress, Arizona Sen. Carl Hayden and Missouri Rep. Clarence Cannon, delayed an appropriations conference committee for months while they fought over which chamber would be the host for the sessions. 
Finally, a new room was constructed in the dead center of the Capitol to house the meetings. 

   The two chambers also bickered for nearly two decades over the building's crumbling west front. 
House members wanted to extend the front by a few feet to create more office space; senators preferred strict preservation. 
Only in 1983, when tumbling chunks of the Capitol made it clear that something had to be done, did the House give in. 

   In Mr. White's master plan for the Capitol grounds, what is now asphalt would become a vista of Belgian pink granite, crosscut with an intricate geometric pattern. 
The goal would be to restore the Capitol grounds to the grandeur of the 1890s, when only horses and buggies traversed the plaza designed by Frederick Law Olmstead in 1874. 
(Mr. White still parks his Jeep on the plaza, although he says he would give up the privilege in a minute in exchange for his park.) 

   Under the architect's plan, the House and Senate sides of the square would each be provided with a bubbling, low-rimmed fountain. 
He even has the fountains ready: two such units, donated to the federal government in 1968 by philanthropist Rose Sail Zalles as part of a beautification plan set forward by Lady Bird Johnson, which have been in storage ever since. 
The estimated cost: $7.6 million, under a 1985 bill that found little support. 

   But Congress has never quite come to grips with the more prosaic problem of what to do with the cars that now park on the plaza. 
Sen. Cranston and others have suggested consideration of an underground parking garage, but the cost could be exorbitant; some observers put the price tag for a 500-car facility as high as $15 million, or $30,000 a spot. 
The architect's master plan, meanwhile, calls for additional parking sites to be built several blocks from the Capitol, but that stirs little enthusiasm among those who are used to parking much closer. 

   Among those who aren't enthusiastic are members of the Capitol Hill press corps. 
"The press is a vociferous lobby and make their views known to the leadership," says Mr. Petersen, the Senate press-gallery superintendent. 
Paula Schwed, the chairwoman of the Standing Committee of Correspondents, defends her colleagues and says they will give up their spaces as soon as everyone else does. 
She adds: "It's not exactly a First Amendment right." 

   While the wrangling continues, the Senate has already started vacating its half of the lot in front to show its concern. 
In May, it refused to renew the permits for some 100 parking-space holders, assigning them instead to less desirable locales. 
Eventually, Senate officials say, all its permit holders will be relocated. 

   The House lot, meanwhile, is as crowded as ever, which rankles a lot of Senate people. 
"It looks kind of foolish, doesn't it?" says James Thorndike, journal clerk in the office of the secretary of the Senate, as he surveys the scene. 
"Talk about a house divided." 

   Mr. White advances a compromise proposal to replace lost spots with additional side-street spaces while going ahead with the park. 
He has already laid out the plans to the Senate whips and says he is eagerly awaiting a chance to do the same at the House. 
House leaders don't seem to be in a hurry to schedule the presentation. 

   At least some on the House side, however, fear that the leadership will eventually give in and let Mr. White's park go forward -- though they dread the day that happens. 
Deborah McFarland, an aide to House Democratic Whip Tony Coelho, laments: "I imagine one day I'll be forced to park out in the suburbs." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
