ID: 146	RANK: 92	SCORE: 7.868978
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880607-0134 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS: Architecture: A Conservatory Grows in San Antonio </HL>
<AUTHOR> Ellen Posner </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> San Antonio, Texas  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Emilio Ambasz's portfolio is filled with unbuilt architectural projects. 
They employ mist, rainbows, waterfalls, grapevines. 
Some are partly nestled under the earth. 
Others are meant to float in lagoons. 
One calls for an ascent across a wide, steep transparent stairway that contains narrow cascades of water at its edges. 
When the 44-year-old New York based, Argentinean architect speaks about his work, he tends to invoke fables, magic and poetry. 

   Dreamy and metaphorical as some of these projects may seem, however, all of them have been worked out carefully in terms of structure and materials. 
Which isn't really terribly surprising, since a handful of Mr. Ambasz's smaller-scale and residential designs actually have been built -- and also since he is a working industrial designer with a fair number of useful, practical objects to his credit. 
There is, for example, the diesel engine that he redesigned for the Cummins Engine Co. (for which he serves as chief design consultant), the series of office chairs that move in response to the activities of their human inhabitants (one of the chairs is in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art), and a new folding toothbrush that comes in several variations and that is about to make its way into the Japanese market. 

   Emilio Ambasz's credentials as an architect are being enhanced as well, with the completion of his first large-scale public project: the $6.9 million Lucile Halsell Conservatory here at the San Antonio Botanical Center. 

   Established with a mix of city, federal and private funds, the center, which sits on a scenic hill that is San Antonio's highest point, opened its formal flower gardens and 16 acres of indigenous Texas plants in 1980. 
Not too long after that, the private, not-for-profit San Antonio Botanical Society, which was assisting the city's Department of Parks and Recreation in operating the complex, set out to increase its scope by providing it with a facility that could accommodate non-native species. 

   Funds were raised (mostly from the local Ewing Halsell Foundation), Mr. Ambasz was hired, and construction was supervised by the society. 
And in February, as exotic ferns, palms, cactuses and orchids settled in to their respective controlled environments, the San Antonio Botanical Society turned the completed conservatory over to the city of San Antonio, which opened it to the public. 

   The drawings and model for the conservatory showed wavy lines, skewed crystal shards and glass-covered mounds of earth and looked like a fantasy landscape. 
The actual version, however, while it is not without mystery and resonance, also represents very straight-forward solutions to geographic and climatic conditions. 

   Using the same yellowy Lanno field stone that lines the city's famous Paseo del Rio, a footpath with restaurants and shops along the San Antonio River, Mr. Ambasz created a long, slightly undulating wall that fits snugly against the hillside. 
A low passageway scooped out at the middle of the wall admits visitors to the conservatory and to the hollowed-out, open-to-the sky heart of the hillside, where the various reinforced-concrete components are arranged around a courtyard and a tiny lake. 

   Mr. Ambasz has not been called upon to build a typical cold-climate greenhouse that would allow for maximum sunlight. 
He was asked to create an environment that would protect the plants from San Antonio's intense sun as well as its occasional strong winds. 
And earth -- which interests Mr. Ambasz anyway, for its primitive and elemental associations, and which he added to around the structure -- is an excellent natural insulator. 
Not that the interiors are dark: the long tilted triangles and interrupted curves of transparent glass that rise out of the hillside on intricate aluminum space frames allow sunlight to enter at levels that can be regulated by computer-operated shades. 

   The desert room (with its own little arroyo), the fern room (with waterfalls and intermittent mist), the dazzling palm house (where visitors circle the edge of the structure by climbing a ramp), and so on, are separate entities, each one with its own glass entrance behind the loggia. 
In order to go from one room to the other, visitors return to the courtyard's natural weather, which offers physical relief from climates that are better suited to flora than people, as well as spiritual relief from the rooms themselves, which tend to be compact, heavily planted and very clearly the plants' domains. 

   Not all of the subtleties of Mr. Ambasz's design were effectively translated into the built form. 
The lake, for example, which in drawings had the free-form look of a dropped handkerchief, has turned out to have wavy rock edges and a sentimental look that would not be inappropriate for a motel courtyard. 
And the preliminary elliptical spaces that lead from the entrance into the courtyard (the first of which contains a single tree in its center; the second, a festive planting of flowers) seem unnecessary, except, perhaps, as party spaces. 

   But the conservatory is for the most part imaginative and often beautiful. 
The glass, for example, changes its cast and its sparkle with changes in daylight, and the shapes can be especially dramatic at sunset or when illuminated from within at night. 
Mr. Ambasz's design also happens to respect the purposes of the institution as well as of the site and the neighborhood. 
For San Antonio, this is no small matter. 

   Residents of the city who were involved in the building's development admit to having had an ancillary agenda; that is, to demonstrate that high aesthetic standards need not impede the progress and development that city officials are pursuing eagerly. 

   Henry Cisneros, the city's dashing and nationally visible young mayor, is ^alling 1988 San Antonio's "Year of Emergence," for example, and there has been a series of sizable new projects under way. 
Mr. Cisneros urged a visitor to see the recently opened downtown shopping mall, River Center. 
It straddles the Paseo del Rio, has all the usual stores and all that usual emptiness and might as well be in Milwaukee. (Next-door, there is a new gigantic pink Marriott Hotel that appears to be based on Michael Graves's Humana Building in Louisville and that is threatening to dominate the skyline.) 
Mr. Cisneros also was very enthusiastic about the $150 million branch of Sea World with whales and penguins that has just opened. 

   The city's downtown has, like many others, been hard hit by the appearance of suburban shopping malls, and there seems to be a serious effort under way to revive it. 
This is very important to the economic survival of San Antonio, since tourism is the second industry of this low-key romantic city (its chief business is military). 

   Part of the success of the new conservatory may be that it encourages San Antonians to keep their sights high. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
