ID: 146	RANK: 96	SCORE: 7.837301
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870724-0143 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
On Sports: One Man's Model Ballpark
---
By Frederick C. Klein</HL>
<DD> 07/24/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Chicago  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Philip Bess is an architect and a baseball fan, and he wishes that his professional eye didn't so often interfere with his enjoyment of his favorite sport. 

   "Except for golf, no game is as much affected by the shape of the field on which it's played as baseball, which gives us architects a rare opportunity to influence it," he says. 
"Yet I think that with few exceptions, Major League stadiums built since 1960 have made the game duller instead of more interesting." 

   The modern stadium, Bess contends, is too big, too sterile and too uniform. 
Though a relatively young man (he's 35 years old), he yearns with a baseball fan's inbred sense of nostalgia for the old days, when parks differed widely in size, shape and terrain. 
Yes, terrain; the outfield in old Crosley Field in Cincinnati sloped up sharply just before the fences. 

   "Where would you rather watch a game, in Fenway Park in Boston {built in 1912}, with its Green Monster left-field wall and asymmetrical dimensions, or Three Rivers Stadium in Pittsburgh {built in 1970}, which looks like it was stamped out of a cookie cutter?" 
Bess asks. 
Next question. 

   Bess thinks that the effects of modern megastadiums have been equally unfortunate on the cities in which they stand. 
"They're so big that they repel adjacent development rather than attract it," he asserts. 
"If you look at aerial photos of them, they resemble nothing so much as bomb craters, surrounded by nothing but parking lots. 
It's no wonder that they seldom live up to their expectations of subsidiary economic benefits." 

   Bess, who teaches architecture at the University of Notre Dame and is in private practice in Chicago, understands that the dimensions of the old, idiosyncratic ballparks, such as the Polo Grounds in New York, Ebbets Field in Brooklyn, and Forbes Field in Pittsburgh, were the result of necessity, not architectural invention. 
Their odd shapes were dictated by the tight, urban settings in which they stood. 
The rightfield wall at Ebbets Field, for instance, couldn't be more than 301 feet from home plate because Bedford Avenue was hard behind it. 
By contrast, recently built stadiums were erected on roomier, regular-shaped tracts in which no such constraints existed. 

   But he believes that there are more factors than site considerations behind the sameness of modern baseball stadiums, and he lumps them under the heading of the bureaucratization of baseball. 

   "The people who've designed the stadiums of the last 25 or 30 years have defined their goals in terms of architectural structure rather than the purpose of the facility," he says. 
"They've been mainly concerned with erecting long-span, column-free decks with good sight lines. 
They also want easy motor-vehicle access. 
In other words, the game of baseball is not their department. 
The people who commission the parks and might stick up for the game seem to have a notion of 'fairness' that translates into a regularity of field dimensions. 
What they forget is that 'fair' can also mean boring." 

   The architect says he conceives of ballpark fairness in terms of balance rather than uniformity. 
"Let the Yankees have their short right-field fence. 
When they come to your park, make 'em hit it a mile to get a home run to right," he says by way of illustration. 

   He does not think it impertinent to suggest that the quirks once forced by odd-shaped urban sites could be supplied as well by the architect. 
"I suppose it's contrived, but so what? 
Better that than what we're getting now." 

   Bess has never designed a stadium, but he's no dilettante on the subject. 
He heads a committee of SABRE, the organization of baseball researchers, to draw up a scheme for a "model" urban ballpark. 
With new parks in the works for Chicago, Cleveland and San Francisco, and Baltimore and Milwaukee considering them, the group believes it had better register its views before the cookie cutter strikes again. 

   The drawing on this page reflects that effort. 
Done with a grant from the Graham Foundation here, it's Bess's design for a new ballpark in Chicago, to replace the White Sox's aged Comiskey Park. 
It would sit not on the field's present site, but on a city park behind it. 
Comiskey Park would be leveled, and serve as a foyer to the new installation. 
Its baseball diamond would be retained so that local kids could tread the base paths once trod by Aparicio, Fox and Minoso. 
Nice touch, that. 

   The park would seat 40,200 people, which Bess thinks is about right in terms of stadium size and game interest. 
"Thirty thousand is a big crowd for baseball, and the game is more exciting in a three-quarters-full stadium that seats 40,000 than a half-empty place seating 60,000," he says. 
The field surface would be grass, and God's sun would warm customers at day games, because there'd be no dome. 

   The best thing about the park would be its dimensions, Bess says. 
Symmetry would prevail, but an unusual one. 
The fences would measure a short 280 feet down both foul lines, so the promise of the "easy" home run would beckon, but flare to 422 feet in left- and right-center, opening the possibility of lots of fan-pleasing triples. 
The 390-foot fences in the power alleys, he thinks, would satisfy the "fairness" bugs. 

   "It's a park people would talk about, which means it's one they would attend," he says. 
"Being a fan is mostly verbal, isn't it?" 
Yep. 

   Bess says he has few illusions about his park being built. 
He contacted the White Sox a year ago about his plan for a similar stadium for another site then under consideration, and was told to mail it in. 
He did, but received no response. 

   Still, he is undeterred. 
"If you live in Chicago, and like baseball, you must learn to hope," he notes. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
