ID: 119	RANK: 47	SCORE: 17.434803
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870430-0080 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Pyramid Power: Egyptomania on the Mississippi
---
By Pam Lambert</HL>
<DD> 04/30/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> Memphis, Tenn.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   This delta city where once cotton, then Elvis, was king has a new ruler -- a 3,200-year-old Pharaoh named Ramesses II. 
There are mummies at the Pink Palace Museum and swaddled mannequins simulating them in the windows of M.M. Cohn, hieroglyphic cartouches painted in downtown crosswalks and Egyptian murals on classroom walls. 
You can "room with Ramesses" at the Ridgeway Inn and eat a "Ramburger" at Huey's. 
There's even serious talk of erecting a 32-story, $48 million golden pyramid arena on the river front. 

   "It's almost impossible to walk into a public place and not hear people talking about Ramesses," says Lynn Gipson, a student at Memphis State University. 

   The immediate cause of the Pharaonic fever isn't hard to find. 
"Ramesses the Great," an eye-popping exhibition of Egyptian treasures -- including a 24-foot, seven-inch colossus specially restored for this occasion -- has just begun a 4 1/2-month run at the Memphis Convention Center with more than 300,000 tickets sold in advance. (The spelling in the show's title is the one used by most Egyptologists.) 

   But Egyptomania runs as deep here as the roots of the city's stately white oaks, stretching back over a century and a half. 
Gazing at the Mississippi from the Fourth Chickasaw Bluff, town founder Gen. James Winchester was reminded of another great river -- the Nile -- and an ancient metropolis that had flourished there. 
What more auspicious name for a new settlement than that of this storied city -- Memphis? 

   Memphis, the Egyptian one, was also on the mind of MSU art professor Charles Allgood, who back in 1975 persuaded the university to acquire a teaching collection of 44 objects spanning the full range of Egyptian history and culture. (The collection has since tripled in size.) 

   To celebrate the installation of the artifacts in its new gallery in the fall of 1983, MSU organized a loan exhibition, "A Divine Tour of Ancient Egypt." 
Young Egyptologist Rita Freed was invited to curate it. 
She accepted, then consulted a map to locate Memphis. 

   "I think people had so much fun with that show, they just weren't willing to let it die," the ebullient Ms. Freed recalls with a smile. 
The "Divine Tour" begat an audacious plan -- an Egyptological institute for Memphis State. 
The response it aroused would have gratified even Ramesses: Within a week, local businessmen pledged $1 million over a 10-year period. 
"We thought right from the beginning that this could be something to set Memphis apart from other cities," says Richard A. Trippeer Jr., chairman of Union Planters National Bank, one of the facility's biggest backers. 

   In October, 1984, Jihan Sadat formally opened MSU's Institute of Egyptian Art and Archaeology, with Ms. Freed as its director. 
Discussions had already begun with the venerable London-based Egypt Exploration Society on joint excavation efforts to help save the site of ancient Memphis from a rising water table and monument-eroding soil salinization. 

   In short order the institute bought a 3,500-volume Egyptian library from the estate of scholar H. W. Fairman. 
Then it acquired 1,000 volumes from Memphis-born Egyptologist Elizabeth Thomas. 
And in 1985 it added a second Egyptologist. 
"I'm sitting here in Brooklyn in awe of what they've done; it's a textbook case of development," observes James Romano, an associate curator at the Brooklyn Museum. 

   Word about the institute traveled fast. 
One day local resident Claire Austin brought in a rose-red hatbox containing a curious object that had been kicking around her family for decades. 
Lifting the lid of the box, Ms. Freed got quite a surprise: It contained "one of the best-preserved mummy heads in existence." 

   Publicity about the find brought the institute a call from a Detroit pawnbroker with an offer it couldn't refuse -- a full mummy, complete with beautifully crafted coffin (and documentation that it hadn't been smuggled out of Egypt). 
Rescued at a cost of $45,000 from the unheated storage room where he had spent the previous decade, the 2,500-year-old mummy was honored with a gala ceremony in January, 1986. 
Mayor Richard C. Hackett welcomed the city's "oldest and most expensive resident"; soldiers from a visiting production of "Aida" carried the coffin. 

   But Memphians hadn't seen anything yet. 
Thanks to one Honey Scheidt, they would. 

   While touring Egypt with her husband, the institute board member dropped in at the Cairo Museum. 
Director Mohamed Saleh told her about a blockbuster exhibition he was preparing to send to several cities overseas. 
Replied Honey, "Great; why can't Memphis have it?" 

   There were many why nots; protracted negotiations by a team led by Mayor Hackett overcame them. 
But the Memphians weren't content with the existing show of more than 70 artifacts. 
"The previous high attendance for an exhibition in the city had been 60,000," explains Ms. Freed, who would curate the exhibit here. 
"We needed somehow to lure people who would never think of coming to a museum." 

   The Tennessee Memphians found what they were looking for in the weeds behind a museum in Memphis, Egypt. 
Even in its ruined condition -- three huge hunks of granite and several dozen smaller fragments -- there was an aura of majesty about the shattered colossus. 

   The Egyptian Antiquities Organization was sympathetic. 
After all, it did have a stake in the show. (Each host city had to guarantee the EAO $350,000 for use of the antiquities plus any profits after the cost of staging the exhibition.) 
Nevertheless, it was firm: Ramesses the Great couldn't be shown in a less-than-stately state. 
Coca-Cola Bottling Co. of Memphis provided the $100,000 necessary to restore the statue. 

   While a team of 30 conservators labored in Egypt, in Tennessee the presenters were working equally hard to engineer the exhibit's success. 
A delegation headed by Mayor Hackett and Raouf El Reedy, the Egyptian ambassador to the U.S., hosted promotional receptions in six key regional cities. (The morning after its presentation in Jackson, Miss., bookings were made for 108 bus-loads of tourists.) 

   Word about the show was also spread through the Mid-South by a "speakers bureau" of volunteer lecturers. 
In nine months the 55 speakers, who gave slide presentations on Ramesses and his time to Rotaries, Kiwanis, Lions and gardening clubs, reached as many as 20,000 potential ticket buyers. 

   But perhaps the best advertisement for "Ramesses the Great" is the show itself. 
Each host city has been responsible for its own exhibition design and catalog, and in both areas Memphis has done itself proud. 
The Egyptian temple setting designed by George Sexton Associates succeeds in creating a museum ambience within a cavernous space. 
And Ms. Freed's vivid, copiously illustrated catalog (City of Memphis, 239 pages; $25 hardcover, $10 soft) is the equal of the exhibit. 

   Beyond the rippling economic impact on the city -- $75 million to $100 million according to the latest projections -- there may be broader benefits. 
Many regard the exhibition as a unifying force in a community once torn apart by the assassination here of Martin Luther King Jr. 
"We can all pull together over Egyptology," says Vivian Berryhill, chairman of the show's visitors' information center. 
Her husband, pastor of the Rising Sun Baptist Church, is one of the black clergymen throughout the city "getting the word out on Ramesses" and encouraging group visits by their flocks. 

   Eventually Memphis will have a permanent reminder of Ramesses if it proceeds with the proposed golden pyramid. 
But it won't be the city's first. 
That distinction belongs to a 19 1/2-foot-tall sculpture that looks like a pyramid when you're whizzing by the Welcome Center on I-55 South. 
"I hope this stimulates Memphis to build another pyramid," says sculptor Tom Wuchina. 
"This great city should be known for something besides barbecue and Elvis Presley." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
