ID: 119	RANK: 94	SCORE: 12.883436
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ881028-0114 </DOCNO>
<HL> After the Good Life, What Better Death Than as a Mummy? --- Revival of the Egyptian Art Gives the Me Generation A Crack at Immortality </HL>
<AUTHOR> Robert Johnson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<DATELINE> SALT LAKE CITY, Utah  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   A coconut fragrance pervades the dimly lit room as Bernie Beichert puts the final touches on the delicate project before him. 
It is Butch, a beloved Doberman pincher, now deceased. 

   Yards of linen swath the dog, covered by a blend of fiberglass and polyethylene. 
Inside lies a body painstakingly soaked in wine, herbs and scented oils. 
The result: a modern-day mummy, destined to endure for century upon century. 

   Mr. Beichert's voice fills with emotion as he applies the last layer, a thin film of 23-karat gold. 
"Butch used to sit there smiling, just like this, and now he always will. 
He was a great dog. 
He deserved something special." 

   But if a dog merits mummification, how much more so his master? 
The truth is, the care lavished on Butch is largely practiced. 
In certain circles, human beings are dying to become mummies. 

   Paving the way for them is Summum Bonum, a wine-making society that takes its name from the Latin for "the highest good" and sells its wines for as much as $360 a bottle. 
Long dedicated to the good life, it has turned its attention to the good death. 

   The growth of cremation and mass-market funerals, Summum Bonum believes, leaves many people yearning for a more personalized passage. 
It thinks mummification may be just the thing for aging members of the Me Generation who might like to make a statement, perhaps leave behind a memorial to themselves, and escape the final insults of nature. 

   There may be money in it, too. 
Ancient Egyptians used wine to help preserve bodies, so the wine-making society considers mummies a logical diversification. 
It is enrolling members in embalming school, patenting its process and touting it in brochures. 

   About 100 would-be mummies have signed up so far, depositing $500 to ensure their places. 
Some clients make Summum Bonum an insurance beneficiary to cover the rest of the cost, usually an additional $7,000. 
But those accounts aren't yet receivable; most mummy candidates are in their 30s and 40s, "so it may be a while," concedes Claude Nowell, the society's director. 
Meanwhile, volunteers like Mr. Beichert hone their skills on pets. 

   The base price will get a customer soaked for two months in wine, herbs and chemical preservatives, coated with scented oils and bound in a cocoon of linen, fiberglass, polyethylene and plaster. 
But more is available. 
Summum Bonum hopes the same ego appeal that hooked the Pharoahs on mummification will make customers of Yuppies. 
So it is offering upscale options like gold overlays or encrusted jewels on bronze mummiforms (body-shaped caskets), costing $100,000 and more. 

   Modern immortals may indeed want extras. 
Kay Henry, a Salt Lake City radio talk-show host, hopes to have her mummiform inlaid with a microphone. 
Janet Greco, a flight nurse here, wants hers to feature a bronze face mask of herself, with the Beatles' "White Album" squeezed in beside her. 
Her husband Al, she says, wants to repose with a favorite wrench. 

   As for motives, they are a personal thing. 
"Mummification seems nicer," Ms. Greco says. 
"More care is taken with your remains. 
I'm just a clean-cut American who wants to go out a little differently." 

   "Some important world leaders have done it," offers Julie Garvin, a Stanton, Calif., costume designer who is considering mummification. 
She cites some of the Dalai Lamas. 

   Switching traditions, she adds: "If it's true as some Christians say that on Judgment Day Christ will call us up from the grave, then I want to be in the best shape I can." 

   For this purpose, mummification beats cryogenics, advocates claim. 
They fault the deep-freeze technique as costly and undependable. 
Think what would happen if the power went off. 
As for state health standards, the mummifiers are confident they could meet them. 

   For many people, though, mummies have an image problem, not to say a skeleton in the closet. 
The problem is a curse, which falls on whoever disturbs a mummy. 
That, at least, is the notion spread by Egyptian pyramid builders who wanted to scare off grave robbers. 

   As if to confirm the peril, the Earl of Carnarvon, whose expedition broke through the door of King Tutankhamen's tomb in 1922, died unexpectedly six months later. 
A robust 57-year-old, he succumbed to an infection that followed an insect bite and shaving nick, says Catharine Roehrig, an Egyptologist at Boston's Museum of Fine Arts. 
The Times of London published an exclusive quoting sources as blaming King Tut's curse for his death. 
Before long, other London papers were embellishing the story each time a tourist died on a visit to Egypt. 

   Hollywood film makers soon seized on the plot. 
Playing the lead role in "The Mummy" in 1932, Boris Karloff wore gauze and white makeup but looked more like Frankenstein's monster. 
Mummified stunt men wreaked havoc in seven sequels. 
"The Mummy's Tomb" offered Lon Chaney Jr. as an Egyptian mummy who went to America to kill archaeologists; "The Mummy's Curse" had Mr. Chaney as a mummy dug up in a Louisiana bayou (and not happy about it), and "The Mummy's Ghost" teamed Mr. Chaney with mummy mentor John Carradine to chase a reincarnated Egyptian princess. 

   The movies stopped years ago, but funeral directors are still horrified by mummies. 
"I think most practical people would find mummification repulsive," says Gregory Jewell, an executive of Service Corp. International, America's largest funeral-home owner and a big coffin maker. 
"I hope no member of my family would consider it. 
If it sells, I'll be the first one to eat my hat." 

   Then again, the funeral industry also was long skeptical of cremation, which now replaces 15% of burials. 
And the mummy market is showing tiny signs of life. 
Georgia Marble Co., its sales hurt by the cremation trend, has built a 10-inch-tall model mausoleum with two ceramic mummies inside, to be displayed at burial-industry trade shows. 
Instead of crypts, there is plenty of open space for viewing decorated (and upright) mummies. 

   Mortuary schools currently don't teach mummification, but one, the College of Boca Raton in Florida, says it may start such a class soon. 
And the Summum Bonum society hopes that if it can get the ball rolling, it can someday franchise its service. 

   So how many more good years could a mummy client hope for? 
"Many Egyptians have been found intact after 2,000 years," says Mr. Nowell, "and we think our process is far superior." 

   For some, that would be enough. 
Ms. Henry, the talk-show host, is pleased to envision herself in a mausoleum: "In the winter, my kids won't have to think of mom under the frozen ground," she says. 

   For Mr. Beichert, too, mummification promises a reprieve from life in the trenches. 
"I come home every day smelling like fish," says the Summum Bonum member, who works as a restaurant manager. 
"I don't like the thought of me rotting away in the grave." 
His mummy will have a sealed-in fragrance, perhaps of jasmine. 

   If he comes out as well as Butch the Doberman, Mr. Beichert will be eternally happy. 
There's no rush, of course, says the trim 30-year-old. 
"I have a lot of living to do first, I hope." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
