ID: 194	RANK: 91	SCORE: 19.218283
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870105-0054 </DOCNO>
<HL> Letter From Bilbao:
Industrial Port City in Northern Spain
Begins to Revive After 10-Year Decline
---
By Nicholas Bray
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 01/05/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> EUROP
MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN>
<DATELINE> BILBAO, Spain  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Viewed from the mountainside highway above, the Nervion estuary's old factories and dockyards -- many of them abandoned -- resemble a bleeding gash in Spain's forest-covered northern coast. 

   On the estuary's right bank, old shipyards and engineering works alternate with grimy housing, much of it empty. 
On the left bank, the chimneys, cranes and furnaces of a steelworks rise amid heaps of red-brown iron ore and black coal. 
Further on, past oil refineries, chemical plants and the wharfs and jetties of Bilbao, Spain's largest port, are the luxury villas of Neguri, once inhabited by the city's industrial and financial elite. 

   For years, the Nervion estuary was the center of Spain's industrial development. 
But today, many of Neguri's villas are derelict. 
An exodus of industrialists and financiers, and their families, is the result of 10 years of business decline that began in the 1970s with the crisis in the world steel and shipbuilding industries and was worsened by terrorism by the region's Basque extremists. 

   Through kidnappings (four businessmen have been held for ransom in the past 18 months), shootings and bomb attacks, the Basque separatist organization ETA has created an atmosphere of fear that has made it harder for Bilbao to pull out of its economic decline. 

   When Spain joined the Common Market a year ago, Bilbao seemed unprepared to face the new competition. 
Yet today, though unemployment remains at more than 26% of the labor force and terrorism continues, there are signs of a timid recovery. 

   Compared with the more than 50,000 industrial jobs that have been lost over the past 10 years, the results so far are modest. 
But industrial investment is slowly picking up and antiquated industries are being renewed. 
The Basque region's output of goods and services, after declining from 1980 through 1983 despite rising output in all of Spain, grew in 1984 and 1985. 
The region's recovery reflects Bilbao's recovery, for the city's one million people account for half the region's population, and its industry is still the region's economic engine. 

   "It's now clear that industrial activity is going to survive in the Nervion estuary, something that wasn't at all sure a few years ago," says Roberto Velasco, a former chamber of commerce official who was appointed in July 1985 to head an "urgent re-industrialization" agency for the Nervion estuary. 

   Bilbao's improvement is largely a result of publicly funded aid programs like those offered by Mr. Velasco's agency. 
In addition to tax breaks and cheap loans, the government and regional authorities will pay as much as 30% of the cost of new projects. 
Companies that come here can get subsidies of as much as $7,350 for each worker hired. 

   Altos Hornos de Vizcaya, a publicly quoted steelmaker with 30,000 shareholders and a $530 million investment program, is playing a leading role in the area's industrial modernization. 
Its plants are being reshaped and its work force cut -- from 12,700 people in 1981 to fewer than 9,000 now and a projected 6,700 by 1989. 
Officials expect it to be competitive with leading West German steelmakers by 1990. 

   The Basque regional government is helping to finance a projected near-doubling in local spending on industrial research and development. 
Mr. Velasco's industrial development agency has helped to bring in new investors. 
Since its creation it has approved subsidies for 47 projects involving investments totaling more than $260 million and the creation of nearly 2,000 jobs in sectors ranging from electronics to auto parts. 
Most of the new investment is Spanish, but about 30% involves foreign capital, mainly from West Germany and the U.S. 

   The biggest, a $111 million project providing 640 jobs, on which work is due to start early next year, groups Rolls-Royce Ltd. of Britain, Fiat Aviazione of Italy and Motoren &amp; Turbinen-Union G.m.b.H. of West Germany in a joint venture with Sener Turbo Prop S.A. of Spain to make parts and jet engines for a new European fighter aircraft. 
The project is expected to create 1,000 more jobs among subcontractors. 

   Further job reductions will be inevitable as local industries continue reshaping. 
Terrorism, too, though its violence is considerably less than a few years ago, seems likely to remain a problem, at least until Basque political parties reach agreement on the region's future relations with the rest of Spain. 
Economic growth in the Basque country over the next few years seems likely to continue lower than the national average. 
But the worst, thanks to the region's strong business traditions and to vigorous government intervention, looks as if it's past. 

   "The crisis isn't over," says Mr. Velasco. 
"But the collapse of Basque industry has been halted." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
