ID: 228	RANK: 92	SCORE: 17.036936
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ871207-0034 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
TV: Chatter, Chatter, Chatter
---
By Robert Goldberg</HL>
<DD> 12/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   There's been an awful lot of talk on the tube over the past two weeks. 
Sad to say, most of it wasn't worth listening to. 

   First came the pre-summit media barrage. 
Amid a lot of ballyhoo and brouhaha, Tom Brokaw scored the first one-on-one American TV interview with Mikhail Gorbachev last Monday on NBC. Actually, it was Mr. Gorbachev who did the scoring. 

   While Mr. Brokaw fidgeted on the edge of his seat, Mr. Gorbachev (who had every reason to be a little nervous in his first face-to-face with the American people) sat back, relaxed and confident. 
The Soviet leader had come to campaign, and he did it masterfully. 
His gestures were sharp and vigorous, his presence strong and commanding. 
In short, the man has TV style. 

   As for what Mr. Gorbachev actually said -- well, he was campaigning. 
Mostly, he mouthed platitudes: "We need mutual understanding," he said. 
"We must display greater respect for each other." 
There was a lot of rhetoric, a lot of party line. 
I kept wondering: "Where's the beef?" 

   Now of course Mr. Gorbachev wouldn't admit that the Soviet Union had invaded Afghanistan. 
Of course he wouldn't concede that Soviet citizens are not free to come and go as they please. 
But it really ticked me off when he wouldn't even pick a favorite American author. 
That's too much diplomacy. 
Was he afraid a secret admiration for Hemingway might be construed as "adventurism"? 
Was he concerned a passion for Fitzgerald equals "petty bourgeois ideology"? 
Fess up, Mikhail. 

   One thing you had to admit about Mr. Gorbachev, though. 
He was a lot more dynamic than all the presidential candidates -- Democratic and Republican -- that followed in the "America's Future" debate (NBC) the next night. 
After a few minutes, I switched on "Moonlighting" (which, by the way, was a great episode). 

   Ronald Reagan, no slouch himself when it comes to preening for the camera, appeared Thursday in an interview from the Oval Office. 
Surrounded by four network news anchors, Mr. Reagan faced a much tougher interrogation than his Soviet counterpart: "The right wing is after your scalp" led off Bernard Shaw of CNN. "According to a new ABC/Washington Post survey, Mr. Gorbachev's popularity rating is only 4% lower than your own," followed ABC's Peter Jennings. 

   The great communicator put up a game fight, but he wasn't communicating too well. 
Under the onslaught, Mr. Reagan rambled, confusing his audience and himself as well. 
Asked about the decline of the dollar, the president commented that the surge of cutting interest rates abroad had made the dollar fall. 
You could almost hear an aide offstage moaning. 
"That was not what the president meant to say," came a retraction immediately after the interview. 
"The president meant to say the surge of cutting interest rates abroad has made the dollar rise." 

   Frankly, you can only hope that when Messrs. 
Reagan and Gorbachev sit down to talk this week, there won't be any TV cameras around. 
That way, something may actually be said. 

   ---
   From the sublime to the ridiculous to the crazy: Joining Dick Enberg and Merlin Olsen in the announcer's booth at NBC's Thanksgiving Day game between the Detroit Lions and the Kansas City Chiefs was Dr. Eric Margenau, a psychologist. 
Apparently, since NBC had been stuck with a matchup between the Lions (2-8) and the Chiefs (1-9) -- a Thanksgiving Day battle of the turkeys -- the network decided, "what the heck, they're losers, let's psychoanalyze them." 
So they brought in this football Freud. 

   Between plays, the bearded, bespectacled doctor muttered things about each squad's "psyche," as in "it's really critical for this team's collective psyche not to blow this lead." (They might lose, too.) 

   One place where the talking's getting better: CBS's weekday morning 7 to 9 slot. 

   You may remember the unhappy history of CBS's attempts to compete with the two heavy hitters of a.m. -- NBC's "Today" and ABC's "Good Morning America" -- by transferring their early show under the aegis of the entertainment division. 

   They spawned "The Morning Program," an early morning catastrophe starring Mariette Hartley and Rolland Smith. 
This terminally cute show, full of quilts and happy faces and sentiments such as "make our home your home," reached new heights of dumbness right at the end, with what I like to call "the death show." 

   Because the program had only three days left -- i.e., was dying -- "The Morning Program" devoted an entire show to people who had died in the past year. 
They took a can't-miss series of wonderful old clips (of Fred Astaire, John Huston, Danny Kaye, and so on) and made it miss. 
"It's always sad to bid old friends goodbye," deep-breathed Mr. Smith. 
But "isn't it appropriate for the day before Thanksgiving? 
Aren't we giving thanks for the gifts they gave us?" 

   Morning is now safely back in the hands of the news division. 
The new show, titled "CBS This Morning," comes off as low-key, informative and even fairly intelligent -- maybe not a miracle, but pretty good in comparison. 

   Kathleen Sullivan seems to have the right stuff for a morning-talk-show host -- a good smile and a good reporter's instinct. 
Decked out in Donna Karan suits, she's chic yet informal, laid-back but quick on her feet. 
Neither Ms. Sullivan nor co-host Harry Smith is afraid to ask the tough question (although Mr. Smith could loosen up a bit). 

   The first week's features were solid: Victoria Corderi reporting live from Haiti during the election turmoil, describing how she and her crew were attacked by machete-carrying troops; John Kenneth Galbraith and Apple CEO John Scully discussing the impact of the "crash" on the holiday retail market; Robert Krulwich's offbeat look at the world market in grease (burger drippings, taco fat, etc.). 

   The show's biggest problem is that it hasn't yet established a clear, separate identity. 
It seems to be geared to yuppies (a host with horn-rims, features on new parents, indoor cycling machines and yuppie movies), but it's still too much a clone of its competitors. 
And old allegiances are hard to break. 
Right now, I'd rather be watching the Today show's Bryant and Jane at 7 a.m. Actually, I'd rather be watching my pillow. 
None of this TV talk is worth losing sleep for. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
