ID: 306	RANK: 39	SCORE: 7.030020
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880815-0090 </DOCNO>
<HL> REVIEW &amp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): The Great Communicator </HL>
<SO> </SO>
<G> EXE </G>
<TEXT>
   Ronald Reagan speaks tonight. 
For the delegates he will address at the Republican National Convention in the New Orleans Superdome and for the millions watching on TV the general impression of Mr. Reagan's performance will be familiar: Nobody does it better. 

   Mr. Reagan's communications skills are praised by his admirers but even more by his critics. 
The latter invoke this attribute, plus luck, to explain his undeniable success. 
There is little question that more than any other modern politician, the 77-year-old Mr. Reagan understands the TV medium. 
At times this attribute has been accorded powers less appropriate to an American President than to Merlin the Magician. 
His policy ideas were often largely bankrupt, the idea runs, but he put them across to the electorate with his special powers of communication. 
The bobbing head, the glistening eyes, the little stories, the voice, Mike Deaver manipulating the hands and arms, the Great Communicator. 

   This success-through-voodoo theory of the Reagan presidency is ludicrous on its face, and more important misses the essential point about not only Ronald Reagan but also what currently passes for the modern political process. 
Ronald Reagan does indeed have communications skills. 
What he also has are beliefs. 
What most other politicians have today are "positions." 

   The difference is profound. 
Many voters have become deeply cynical about the things politicians say. 
Falling election turnouts at all levels are one symptom of the voters' skepticism. 
Their skepticism is justified. 
The pols' obsessive opinion polling and their desire for big-audience TV exposure make them afraid to take stands that might give offense. 
The modern politician's fluid, hedged positions would astound, say, the average commodities trader. 

   Now consider Ronald Reagan. 
Whatever one's opinion of his politics, hardly anyone has ever questioned that he truly believes what he is saying. 
The constant appeals to the free market and the power of individual enterprise, the tax cuts, the desire to control spending while restoring the country's defenses, an ardent anticommunism that grew into the Reagan Doctrine, his commitment to "ridding the world" of nuclear missiles, a relentless patriotism and optimism that struck some as almost corny. 

   Raised in small-town Illinois, Ronald Reagan really did come across like a character out of the movies Hollywood once made about Midwesterners living on plain verities. 
Some of us believe those old movies got it about right, too. 
The pundits often derided him for all this, but they never doubted its sincerity. 
Indeed they often cited it as a reflection of Mr. Reagan's naivete. 
The idea of building technologies to protect the U.S. from incoming ICBMs was laughed at as "Ronald Reagan's dream." 

   Or worse, they said he was captive to a rigid ideology. 
Their tastes ran to more pragmatic politicians. 
But ideology, stripped of its recent pejorative connotation, is simply a deeply held core of beliefs. 
Pragmatism, as now practiced and admired in Washington, inevitably requires allowing one's ideas to be mangled and bounced around like Silly Putty, or routinely selling them out for a handful of votes. 
They're pragmatists all right, but who knows what most of these modern politicians believe in? 

   Certainly, belief doesn't ensure success. 
Success in the end means not only having strong ideas but also having the right ideas -- and the confidence to stand fast for them. 
In the face of much derision, Mr. Reagan stood by the belief that cutting taxes would spur the economy. 
Eight years later, the rest of the world is cutting taxes to drive growth and restore the individual's incentive to work hard. 
In his first term, Mr. Reagan's commitment to an active defense posture was mocked as cowboy foreign policy. 
Today the paradox of the Reagan Doctrine is proving out: When the U.S. toughens up, the world's bullies calm down. 

   Mr. Reagan's unapologetic belief in his own ideas -- not his communication skills -- explains his popularity with the American people. 
To deny this is to suggest that the American voters are saps. 
They aren't. 
Check out the voters' record: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, JFK, Lyndon Johnson after some time in the Oval Office, Nixon, the candidate Jimmy Carter. 
The voters have chosen individuals who on balance seemed to be their own men and not someone else's creation. 

   Love him or not, Ronald Reagan's speech tonight will display once again not merely a great communicator but the qualities of political belief that can put, and sustain, a person in the presidency. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
