ID: 306	RANK: 54	SCORE: 6.445114
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870727-0121 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS:
Television: Listen Up, Molly
---
By Martha Bayles</HL>
<DD> 07/27/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   I have some advice for Molly Dodd, and if she knows what's good for her, she'll listen. 
For one thing, I'm not as domineering as her Mom. 
When "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd" premiered in May, the first voice the viewer heard was that of Molly's Mom, carping about her feckless daughter and humming tunelessly to the clock radio, as Molly struggled to get ready for work on a cold Manhattan morning. 
Mom wasn't actually present in Molly's apartment, a Chelsea one-bedroom with hardwood floors, redecorated since Molly's divorce the year before. 
But the viewer could tell from Mom's voice-over that her carping was very much present in Molly's mind. 

   The relationship between mother and daughter must have posed a challenge to Bernie Brillstein and Jay Tarses, the producers of this new and unorthodox "dramatic comedy" (airing Thursdays, 9:30-10 p.m. EDT, on NBC). 
To keep us sympathetic to the annoyingly flaky Molly, the producers had to emphasize the negative side of Mom. 
Otherwise, we might agree with Mom's constant criticism. 
So for starters, they made Mom a social type greatly despised on network TV: an upper-middle-class suburban WASP with stodgy, conventional values. 
She disapproves of Molly's ex-husband, whom she calls "a jazz musician and an idiot." 
She deplores her younger son's decision to go to Oklahoma and live in a tepee, and she uses her younger daughter's affluent, grandchild-producing marriage as the standard by which to measure poor Molly. 

   Why "poor Molly"? 
Well, that's the challenge. 
It's hard to accurately describe Molly without sounding a lot like her Mom. 
At 35, Molly lives alone in New York, half-heartedly pursuing what can only be called a livelihood, since she has neither the talent nor the interest for a career. 
Which is not to say that she has no vocation. 
There is one thing in life Molly passionately wishes to do; and she knows how to do it so well, she's incapacitated when circumstances prevent her from doing it. 

   Whatever Molly's vocation is, it's certainly not the job she recently quit -- "selling condominiums to rich people." 
In the premiere episode, we watched her stumble through a sales session with a handsome Indian millionaire who, fortunately for Molly, was more interested in sniffing her coppery hair than in getting a good price. 
Even accepting the blithe assumption that a competitive firm would hire someone as ineffectual as Molly to negotiate large deals, we can see that she was not born to broker real estate. 

   To end the suspense, I will not stick out my neck and declare that, in my opinion, Molly's true vocation is love. 
As she explains to her psychiatrist, "I was married to a musician named Fred C. Dodd, and the guy has a hold on my heart so tight that sometimes I think I'm never going to breathe again." 
On those rare occasions when Molly is reunited with Fred, her every gesture indicates that she is the type of woman -- loyal, caring and affectionate -- who could find fulfillment in being a wife and mother. 
Her only problem is that she's wasting her talents on the wrong guy. 

   Before you nod, remember that this view of Molly is awfully close to Mom's -- and Mom is an unmitigated shrew. 
When Molly announces that she's going to date the handsome Indian, Mom says, "Couldn't you find someone more . . . white?" 
And when Molly announces that she's going to start seeing a psychiatrist, Mom tells her that she needs a husband, not a "witch doctor." 
It's hard to avoid the conclusion that, however much we may agree with Mom, the people bringing us this show are convinced that the old lady is off the wall. 
They have something better in mind for Molly than love. 

   According to one current school of opinion, love is no longer compatible with female self-respect. 
This opinion is reflected in the scene where Molly fails to get a rise out of her psychiatrist until she blurts out the line about still loving Fred. 
Then the doctor pricks up her ears; clearly, here is evidence of a serious disorder. 
And the same line is quoted in this week's TV Guide article about Blair Brown, the actress who plays Molly, as evidence of the contrast between the fictional Molly and the real-life Ms. Brown. 
Of Ms. Brown, the reporter writes: "Like her character, she is a bit of a free spirit, a rebel." 
But unlike Molly, "Brown is her own person, neatly wrapped around some inner core." 
Why is Ms. Brown such a paragon of personhood? 
Because, unlike Molly, "no one has a chokehold on her heart." 

   This article must reflect some common assumptions, or it wouldn't have found its way into TV Guide. 
Perhaps most bizarre among these assumptions is the one that sees a direct link between a woman's success in life and her avoidance of emotional commitment. 
When, after a nine-year liaison, Ms. Brown discovered she was pregnant, she realized that marriage would be "superfluous." 
As quoted by our admiring reporter: "It wasn't that I wanted to have a baby without a husband. 
I really didn't have any attitude about it." 

   I give up. 
I'm with Mom. 
Are these people crazy? 
Is it now one of the requirements of being one's own person that a woman should have no attitude about the circumstances under which she'll have a baby? 
What is gained by being so independent, so "neatly wrapped around some inner core," if that core is made of Silly Putty? 

   I suppose it's too late now to offer my advice. 
But Mom keeps trying; why shouldn't I? 
I'm especially concerned since it was announced this weekend that "Molly Dodd" has been renewed for 13 additional episodes. 
It seems obvious that the only man who treats Molly with any respect, and in whose company she relaxes rather than twitches with insecurity, is Davey, the elevator operator in her building. 
The joke about Davey is that he's a humble laborer who isn't supposed to know squat about things like poetry and philosophy. 
Yet whenever Molly reads him one of her dilettantish verses, or attempts some profound reflection on life, back comes Davey with a wackily erudite retort. 
Davey is also the only man in Molly's life who cares enough to say, "Hey, I just want you to be the best you can be. 
That's my job. 
I'm an elevator operator." 
He treats her like his equal -- which is exactly what she is, despite her well-to-do background. 
They are both semi-educated eccentrics. 
They are also both lonely, and the gap between their ages is really not that great. . . . 
Are you listening, Molly? 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
