ID: 306	RANK: 65	SCORE: 6.204881
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870929-0070 </DOCNO>
<HL> Tough Fiber:
Du Pont's Difficulties
In Selling Kevlar Show
Hurdles of Innovation
---
Development Took 25 Years,
$700 Million of Outlays;
Profit So Far Is Modest
---
Firm Revamps Its Marketing
---
By Laurie Hays
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 09/29/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> DD
CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN>
<TEXT>
   In the days when chemical companies could invent their way to success, Du Pont Co. set out to make a super-tough fiber that would rival the versatility of its earlier blockbusters, nylon and Dacron. 

   The result was Kevlar, a lightweight miracle five times stronger than steel. 
But the development effort consumed 25 years, $700 million in capital expenditures and, analysts estimate, an additional $200 million in operating losses -- more time and money than the chemicals giant had ever sunk into a single product. 

   Now, the payoff is finally at hand. 
Kevlar has turned what Du Pont considers a "fair to reasonable" profit for the past two years. 
Its annual sales have reached almost $300 million, and, over the next five years, Du Pont forecasts Kevlar's annual sales growth at 10%. 

   Indeed, Kevlar already seems to be everywhere. 
It's in Army helmets, bulletproof vests, flak jackets, tennis rackets, skis, trawling nets, golf clubs and racing sails. 
Kevlar gloves protect the hands of fishermen, auto workers, motorcyclists, gardeners and oyster shuckers. 
Loggers wear Kevlar chainsaw chaps, and heads of state wear Kevlar linings in raincoats. 
President Reagan is said to don a Kevlar vest when in public. 
Embassies decorate with Kevlar curtains that can shield occupants. 

   But despite its versatility, Kevlar hasn't been easy to sell. 
Du Pont's difficulties illustrate that technological breakthroughs don't guarantee financial triumphs. 
"Kevlar was the answer," says Wayne B. Smith, a marketing manager for the fiber, "but we didn't know for what." 

   The search for uses and markets took tens of thousands of man-hours, plenty of false starts and dead ends, and some gambles uncharacteristic of risk-averse Du Pont. 
Success required single-minded, almost-obsessive persistence. 
Researchers discovered applications slowly, sometimes accidentally. 
One of the most promising collapsed, despite heavy investments by Du Pont, because tire makers chose steel belting instead of Kevlar as a substitute for nylon and polyester. 

   Eventually, a team of market-development experts was assigned to dream up uses for the fiber. 
Testing each idea required considerable time and expense. 
"It took us a long time to get here," says Richard S. Reese Jr., Du Pont's director of industrial products. 
Later, Du Pont revamped its entire approach to marketing. 
"We used to sell what we made. 
Now, we make what we can sell," says Malcolm Hecht, a Kevlar marketing specialist. 

   The Kevlar saga has sparked both criticism and praise. 
Some analysts believe that the investment will never pay off. 
They cite competition from other Kevlar-like fibers now crowding the field, Du Pont's own projections that Kevlar sales will plateau in five years and the fact that basic patents on Kevlar start expiring in 1990. 

   But others defend Du Pont's long-term approach as essential for pioneers of new technology. 
They contend that Kevlar, like Velcro, electronic imaging and even ceramic superconductors, had to fight its way into the marketplace. 

   "If you have a new material, you have to beat the world's door down before it's accepted," says Firoze Katrak, a vice president of Charles River Associates Inc., a Boston-based consulting firm. 
"You need a strong stomach to be able to withstand the valleys. 
But when the peak comes, you make obnoxious amounts of money." 

   In the early 1960s, a small group of chemists toiled at Du Pont's experimental station in Wilmington, Del., trying to devise a process that would string together hexagons of carbon by linking them at two points and thus creating a super-strong alignment. (By contrast, the strings of carbon molecules in nylon resemble a tangled ball of yarn; such an alignment is relatively weak because the molecules are linked at only one point, and they twist and tug at each other from various angles.) 

   When the chemists suspended in solution the stiff strings of carbon used in Kevlar, they found them scattered randomly, like bunches of brittle, uncooked spaghetti dropped on the floor. 
The breakthrough came when they discovered that pushing the solution through a syringe would align the strings. 
As a final step, they froze the newly aligned structure. 
They called it Fiber B, and Fiber B became Kevlar. 

   Du Pont was confident that the resilient material would replace nylon in passenger-car tires. 
Compared with steel, its main competitor, Kevlar could be woven more easily into rubber, and it was lighter, stronger and more heat-resistant. 

   "There were visions of Kevlar being the only material in tires," recalls C.O. Holliday Jr., the business manager for Kevlar. 

   By 1980, more than half of all the Kevlar that Du Pont produced was going into tires. 
Product managers were so sure of the venture that they persuaded senior executives to build the first commercial plant, capable of making 45 million pounds of Kevlar a year, at a cost of $500 million. 
Then, shortly after construction started, the tire manufacturers chose steel. 
Kevlar was too expensive, they reasoned, and they said car owners were attracted to the phrase "steel-belted radials." 

   As demand for Kevlar fell, Du Pont settled for a relatively modest niche: tires for race cars and trucks, where the higher price was clearly worth the benefits. 
Corrin Corbin, then the product manager, says he and his crew suffered through a dark period. 
"We had sold the plant based on tires," he recalls, "and it felt like the ship was starting to go down." 

   As Kevlar was being rejected by the tire industry, the U.S. Army began shopping for a fiber to replace nylon in flak jackets because nylon wasn't tough enough to protect soldiers from shrapnel. 
Du Pont submitted Kevlar and waited. 

   The Army spent seven years testing Kevlar alongside hundreds of other fabrics. 
At Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland, projectiles were fired at every material, backed by simulated human tissue made of Silly Putty and modeling clay. 
Du Pont kept reweaving Kevlar to find a blend that wouldn't be too heavy or too hot. 
In the final tests, blankets of half-inch-thick Kevlar were draped over 100 goats, and the animals suffered only minor bruises from .38-caliber pistol bullets. 

   Before the Army made up its mind, Lester Shubin, a crusader for life-saving devices at the National Institute of Justice, surmised that Kevlar could protect policemen. 
He teamed up with Du Pont in a city-by-city campaign to sell bulletproof vests to police departments. 
The vests became so popular that some policemen, and even their wives, bought them with their own money when the departments didn't have the funds. 
Soon, agents for the Secret Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation were wearing Kevlar, too. 

   But market niches in protective clothing and specialty tires weren't enough to justify Du Pont's huge investment. 
A more comprehensive strategy was needed. 
The tightly knit band of fewer than 100 employees who had worked on Kevlar in the early days had relied on seat-of-the-pants tactics with only a limited grasp of market needs and market barriers, according to several of those involved. 

   In the early 1980s, Du Pont decided to overhaul its marketing strategy. 
Instead of inventing products and then hunting for markets for them, it would figure out first what customers needed and then how to make it. 
The Kevlar group, along with others, went to classes at Du Pont to learn the new approach. 
Meanwhile, Kevlar managers recruited companywide for fresh blood; they sought professionals willing to devote their careers to Kevlar rather than people looking for a fast track. 

   The Kevlar group swelled to more than 1,000, with most of the people concentrated in market research and new applications. 
Top management emphasized that no idea should be overlooked, no expense spared. 
"They said, 'Anything you need to make the program go,'" recalls William Huffaker Jr., an account manager. 

   Du Pont won't say how Kevlar finally turned the corner, but some dogged marketing efforts and lucky breaks helped out. 
When Lockheed Corp.'s L-1011 airliner was deemed overweight in the early 1970s, Du Pont pushed Kevlar to replace glass fiber in side panels, bins and galleys. 
Now, Kevlar is one of the composites that aerospace engineers regularly specify in their plans. 
Similarly, Kevlar's resistance to friction and heat made it a worthy substitute when asbestos was outlawed for health reasons. 
And because Kevlar doesn't stretch, it makes a good insulator of fiber-optic cable. 

   Now, Kevlar's miracle reputation sometimes encourages demands for the impossible. 
For example, foreign governments have asked Du Pont to make Kevlar blankets and shoes for soldiers. 
But the blankets, which the soldiers would pull over themselves during an attack, would have to weigh at least eight pounds to be effective. 
And not even a Kevlar shoe could protect a soldier's feet from land mines. 

   Indeed, Du Pont itself has pushed Kevlar to ambitious limits. 
Four years ago, Exxon Corp. volunteered to try out heavy-duty Kevlar cables designed for anchoring offshore drilling platforms. 
After 10 years of research, Du Pont had high hopes. 
So did Simeon Whitehill, owner of a small cable-manufacturing company in Chester, Pa. 
But when the cables were tightened on Exxon's Lena Tower in the Gulf of Mexico, they started snapping, one by one. 
Wave action had created kinks in the fine, wirelike strands. 

   "That was a dark day," Mr. Whitehill acknowledges. 
Now, with Du Pont's help, he has redesigned the casing, and new cables are being tested on a rig owned by Du Pont's Conoco Inc. 

   Early experiments with Kevlar sails flopped, too. 
This time, it was the wind that caused the kinks, and the weakened sails tore violently. 
But because of Kevlar's remarkable stretch resistance, the sailmaker persisted. 
Kevlar sails are less yielding to the wind-making boats faster. 
The kinking was solved by laminating Kevlar to a flexible Mylar film. 

   Even today, Du Pont repeatedly has to prove that Kevlar products are worth their higher prices. 
Lynn Bell, a Du Pont marketing specialist, has spent years trying to convince glove manufacturers that consumers would pay more than twice the price of leather or cotton for Kevlar. 
He had 20,000 Kevlar pairs made and stored and then placed ads for them in fishing and gardening magazines at prices of $14.95 and $19.95. 
Every pair was sold. 

   Now, five manufacturers have agreed to try to sell Kevlar gloves, though they still aren't completely convinced. 
At a recent hardware show in Chicago, a man dressed as a giant armadillo attracted salesmen to one glove booth, but the gloves themselves stirred a lot of skepticism. 

   "People don't know what the hell Kevlar is, and I don't have time to explain it," grumbled one unconvinced salesman visiting the booth. 
"I guarantee you they won't sell." 
Joked another skeptic: "Can they stop bullets if they get wet?" 

   Nevertheless, Du Pont continues its quest for new applications that could make Kevlar a blockbuster. 
Mr. Bell, for example, is thinking about reinforcing the heels and toes of socks with Kevlar to keep them from wearing out. 
He is also trying to design Kevlar booties for hunting dogs. 

   That idea came from Sam Walton, chairman of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., who seized on Kevlar after years of looking for a way to protect the feet of his pointers and setters from brambles and rocks. 
"It isn't a big market," Mr. Bell concedes, "but you don't cast any of these ideas aside." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
