ID: 306	RANK: 78	SCORE: 5.794616
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870226-0079 </DOCNO>
<HL> Painful Process:
Congress Pokes Again
At Perennial Problem,
The Budgetary System
---
It Studies Two-Year Cycle
And Stringent Deadlines
To Ease the Frustrations
---
The Gramm-Rudman Failure
---
By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/26/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)
CONGRESS (CNG)
EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN>
<DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   During an otherwise routine White House meeting between President Reagan and Republican lawmakers two years ago, Sen. Jake Garn erupted in an emotional tirade against the congressional budget process. 

   The procedure had broken down, the Utah lawmaker asserted. 
The American people were being ill served. 
Budget deficits weren't being restrained as they should. 
So heartfelt was his message, other participants recall, that tears rolled down his cheeks. 

   Not every member of Congress sheds tears over the budget process, but most do throw their hands up in frustration. 
The manner in which Congress decides how to spend taxpayers' money increasingly has come under attack for taking too much time and accomplishing too little, as well as for making the legislative lives of many members miserable. 
Consequently, the process will be a target for alteration this year, and the result could have wide-ranging impact on the way government works. 

   Proposals being discussed at the White House and on Capitol Hill include budgeting on a two-year rather than a one-year basis; imposing harsh spending cuts if budget deadlines aren't met; and enhancing the power of the president to trim the deficit by himself. 
But with the presidency weakened and Congress preoccupied by the Iran-Contra matter, no one knows whether such drastic changes stand a chance. 
About the only thing everyone agrees on is that drastic changes are needed. 

   "A lot of people hate the budget process for a lot of reasons," acknowledges Florida Democrat Lawton Chiles, the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee. 
His House counterpart, Pennsylvania Democrat William Gray, adds, "It is a pain." 

   The budget process does have its advantages. 
The ability to examine all federal spending in one document gives lawmakers a far better understanding of the fiscal consequences of individual decisions than they had as recently as the early 1970s. 
The process has also helped focus legislators' attention on what is widely regarded as the government's No. 1 domestic problem: gargantuan budget deficits. 

   But many also find that budgetary pressures have stripped legislators of their ability to legislate: Policy decisions increasingly are dictated not by need but by the numbers, and the numbers are always changing. 
The budget process, which was meant to make an otherwise hodgepodge system rational, has only made matters worse. 
Spending choices are routinely rammed into an indecipherable catchall bill at the end of each fiscal year, which renders any earlier, more thoughtful decisions almost meaningless. 

   The process has "failed" and become "a legislative nightmare," says Democratic Sen. David Pryor of Arkansas. 
Retired Republican Sen. Barry Goldwater of Arizona calls the current system "the most God-awful thing we've ever done." 

   Before 1974, Congress had a two-tiered budget process. 
So-called authorizing committees would decide on the need for and specifics of government programs, while the appropriations committees would vote the funds for them. 
But many found that system to be haphazard, and argued that creating a single, coherent spending blueprint would improve the management of the government. 
Moreover, some thought such a system would increase Congress's control over the purse strings in the wake of its battles over President Nixon's attempted refusal to spend some funds appropriated by Congress. 

   So, in 1974, Congress set up a third layer in the form of a new budget committee in each chamber. 
These panels were charged with drafting a spending blueprint that the rest of Congress would follow. 
It often doesn't work that way. 

   In some years, the blueprint is simply ignored. 
In others, it is composed only after the real budget decisions are already made. 
In the 186 years before the Budget Act, the U.S. accumulated $544 billion of debt; in the years since, through 1986, the government accumulated an additional $1.4 trillion of debt -- though some argue that the deficit would be even greater without the budget process. 

   The core problem has as much to do with politics as with process. 
While everyone agrees on the need to cut the deficit, there isn't any consensus on how to do it. 
Most military programs, Social Security and interest payments are, in effect, off limits. 
But President Reagan remains adamantly opposed to raising income taxes or imposing new taxes, seemingly foreclosing those choices. 

   The resulting gridlock, according to former Budget Director David Stockman, means that budget making "has been reduced to a wearisome, pro forma exercise in futility." 

   To the average lawmaker, the budget process is synonymous with drudgery. 
GOP Sen. Pete Domenici of New Mexico, a former Budget Committee chairman, keeps a painting in his office of the mythological character Sisyphus, who was condemned forever to push a boulder to the crest of a mountain only to have it always roll back down. 
The boulder in the picture is labeled "budget." 

   Last year alone, three Democrats left the Senate Budget Committee; four of the six Democrats who joined the panel are newcomers to the Senate. 
One of those freshmen, Timothy Wirth of Colorado, previously served on the House Budget Committee, and he once remarked: "The pleasure I felt when I got on the Budget Committee was exceeded only by the pleasure I had getting off it." 

   In recent years, the budget effort has consisted of months of waiting, at the end of which cosmetic solutions, such as asset sales, have emerged. 
The droning tedium is "a drain on the strength of the Congress," says former House Republican leader John Rhodes. 
"It has caused the Congress to become moribund and unable to accomplish anything." 

   The budget committees' chief product, called a budget resolution, is essentially a political statement that is subject to alteration throughout the year. 
The resolution doesn't contain any program changes, only numbers, and isn't binding on Congress. 
Democratic Rep. Vic Fazio of California characterizes the budget blueprint as "a relatively innocuous document" over which there is "a great deal of hue and cry." 

   Such skepticism is often well-earned, since projected savings in the budget rarely bear much resemblance to reality. 
Last year's budget blueprint, for example, forecast a deficit of $144 billion in fiscal 1987; the actual deficit for the year ending Sept. 30 will be closer to $180 billion. 
Senate Budget Committee Democrat Donald Riegle of Michigan says that when it comes to the budget, there is "a gentlemen's agreement to live with phony numbers." 

   But those numbers can sometimes be treacherous, members say. 
Last year, for instance, Democratic Rep. Bob Carr of Michigan claimed that he never supported a tax increase -- only to have his election opponent pull out an ancient vote he made on a budget resolution that called for increased revenues. 
"People think it's spending real money," he says, his voice rising in anger. 
"But really, it's such Silly Putty." 

   Nonetheless, the emphasis on numbers has changed the way Congress works by diminishing the influence of the authorizing committees, on which most members serve. 
"The authorizing process is a dead letter," says Democratic Rep. Bruce Morrison of Connecticut. 
Democratic Rep. Robert Matsui of California agrees: "The budget process has rendered three-quarters of the committees in Congress irrelevant." 

   Congress's 1985 passage of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit-reduction law was one attempt to address the failings of the process -- but many regard the law itself as a major failure. 
Mr. Stockman labeled the bill's mandatory deficit-reduction target as "mindless, destructive gimmickry," and adverse court rulings left it largely ineffectual. 

   Indeed, last year marked one of the biggest breakdowns of the budget system. 
The Senate missed its budget deadlines and failed to pass a single appropriations bill; at the end of the session, it rolled virtually all spending into a single piece of legislation, called the continuing resolution. 
Sen. Pryor denounced the measure as representing "the worst of our legislative process" and called it "another 18-pound monument to our own failure and a system encumbered with institutional overload." 
The missed deadlines in particular, says Democratic Rep. Ron Wyden of Oregon, are "the ultimate sign of contempt" for the process. 

   Few people seriously expect next year's Gramm-Rudman deficit target to be reached. 
"We not only can't hit the $108 billion, but we can't even give the appearance of hitting $108 billion," says GOP Rep. Willis Gradison of Ohio, a Budget Committee member. 
Adds Sen. Mark Hatfield of Oregon, the ranking Republican on the Senate Appropriations Committee: "We're talking charades in this whole business." 

   In the meantime, talk is increasing about the need to fix the system again. 
President Reagan wants the authority to veto individual spending programs and a constitutional amendment to balance the budget -- both of which have repeatedly been rejected by Congress. 
Sen. Domenici is leading the call for a two-year budgeting process. 
White House budget officials are itching to impose a deficit-cutting budget on the Congress if it fails to meet its deadlines. 
Other less severe changes also are being discussed. 

   One spur to action could come in mid-May, when Congress will face the need to raise the government's borrowing limit. 
But so far, there isn't much evidence that the voters will demand drastic action, and in any event the history of budgeting changes casts doubt on their effectiveness. 

   "Any process we've come up with we've found a way to get out of," Sen. Chiles says. 
"We slip the noose." 
Indeed, some members say that making such alterations would only mask the deeper political problem. 
"When we don't want to get down to the tough decisions," says Republican Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana, "we talk about the process." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
