ID: 177	RANK: 97	SCORE: 9.181549
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870807-0160 </DOCNO>
<HL> Alewife Population
In Lake Michigan
Ebbs, Flows and Ebbs
---
Tiny Fish Used in Pet Food
Is Also Favored by Salmon,
And Therein Is the Catch
---
By Stephen Buckley
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 08/07/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> ON LAKE MICHIGAN  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   At 4 a.m. aboard the research vessel Neeskay, Donald Stewart is gazing into an eight-inch video monitor in his cluttered workroom. 

   Mr. Stewart, a University of Wisconsin scientist, sips coffee and jots comments in a notebook as he watches fish swim across the screen. 

   He yawns and explains his round-the-clock watch. 
"It's the only way to get a complete picture," he says. 
"It's the only way we'll find out how many alewives are in the lake." 

   At times in the past, the answer to that question was clear: There were far too many alewives. 
The Alosa pseudoharengus, or alewife, is a herring so nicknamed because its protruding belly reminded British fishermen of the women who ran ale houses. 
In the Atlantic Ocean, alewives run to 15 inches or more. 
But in Lake Michigan, the alewives are sardine-sized, averaging about five inches in length. 

   Twenty years ago, the alewife constituted 90% of Lake Michigan's fish population. 
It was so prolific that millions periodically would wash ashore dead on the beaches of Chicago and other Lake Michigan cities, to the dismay of residents. 

   Then in 1966 the state of Michigan found a solution. 
Recruiting a predator fish, scientists dumped into the lake loads of Pacific salmon, which soon began gobbling down alewives. 
The predator brought the alewife population in check, and the salmon began to grow so large that sport fishermen paid big money to catch them. 
The salmon solution was one of the most successful bits of environmental tampering ever. 

   Perhaps too successful, it turns out. 

   Today, scientists worry that the salmon might have overeaten the lake's alewives. 
The tiny fish is disappearing. 
Some studies say the alewife population has plummeted 85% in parts of Lake Michigan; not surprisingly, the average size of sport-caught salmon has also shrunk. 
Now, salmon sport-fishermen and commercial alewife fishermen, who sell to the pet-food industry, are hurling accusations at each other, and scientists are scrambling for answers. 

   "It's really ironic," Mr. Stewart says. 
"Twenty years ago they were spending millions of dollars bulldozing dead alewives off the beaches. 
Now we're spending half a million dollars to find out how many alewives there are." 
And where they all went. 

   The mystery starkly illustrates how difficult it is for man to manage delicate ecosystems, such as the Great Lakes, on a large scale. 
The lakes are a veritable melting pot of fish -- some native, many imported -- that depends on annual stocking to achieve stability. 
Tinkering one way or the other can have a profound, and sometimes unexpected, effect. 

   The lakes' recent troubles started in the 1950s, when an eel-like parasite called the sea lamprey wandered in from the Atlantic Ocean and wreaked havoc in the Great Lakes. 
The lampreys attach themselves to large fish and suck out their vital juices. 

   By the mid-1960s, lampreys had devastated the Great Lakes' population of lake trout, the dominant predator fish that normally feasted on alewives, among other things. 
The alewife population exploded. 

   Biologists first went after the lamprey, lacing its spawning grounds with a chemical that killed its larvae. 
That trimmed the lamprey population, but hundreds of millions of alewives still crowded the lakes, to say nothing of the beaches. 

   "Once I was water-skiing in Lake Michigan and I was coming into shore, so I let go of the rope," recalls Robert Forszt, who grew up in Gary, Ind. 
Suddenly, he says, "I was waist-high in water and knee-deep in dead alewives. 
They were squishing between my toes." 
It was hard to breathe, he says, because of rotting alewives on the beach. 

   Michigan, Wisconsin, Indiana and Illinois, in desperation over the alewife population explosion, flew in millions of Pacific salmon eggs in the late 1960s and early 1970s. 
The mass alewife die-offs stopped, and a lucrative sport-fishing industry was born. 

   "It's a classic example of the old adage 'When the world gives you lemons, make lemonade,'" Mr. Stewart says. 
"The fishery managers made multibillion-dollar lemonade out of the alewife." 

   But now, some fear that too many hands may be squeezing those lemons. 
While sport fishermen happily hooked fat salmon, commercial boats continued netting alewives. 
Now, suddenly, the alewife population has diminished, causing the average size of salmon reeled in to drop to eight pounds from 11 pounds. 

   "Fifteen years ago, you saw a 30-pound salmon every day," says Jeff Thurber, standing in a cold rain next to his charter boat, Down Z Hatch. 
"I haven't seen one in a year." 
Mr. Thurber has just tied up at his Port Washington, Wis., dock after taking five sport fishermen out on a run. 
The biggest catch this day: an eight-pounder. 

   Sport fishermen want state lawmakers to restrict the commercial boats that catch alewives, but Daniel LeClair, a commercial fisherman for 37 years, says, "We only use a half of one percent of the lake, so how could we be the problem? he asks. 
It's the radicals who just want to pick on the little guy." 

   A few yards down the dock from Mr. Thurber, Michael Miller, a research specialist from the University of Wisconsin, is busy gutting fish. 
Under a sign that reads, "Salmon Diet Survey, Fish Cleaned Free," Mr. Miller is hanging a chinook salmon up by the gills. 
In swift, sharp motions, he slices open the fish, cuts through the stomach and pulls out four alewives. 

   "We think the alewife makes up about 75% of the salmon's diet, even though alewives are supposed to be declining," he says, washing his hands with a hose. 
"We can't figure it out." 

   Back aboard the Neeskay, Mr. Stewart's sonar aims to give at least a rough idea of the alewife population. 

   The soft-spoken, bespectacled scientist, surrounded by stacks of blinking electronic equipment, points excitedly at the screen to dozens of fish darting across the sandy lake bottom. 
"You've got a mixture of bloater and alewife," he says. 
"The alewife is the one with the nervous swim." 

   Outside on deck, Doran Mason and a colleague are clawing through clumps of gray mud, plucking fish from the muck hauled up by their trawling net. 
They throw alewives into a gray bucket, bloater into a white bucket, sculpin into a metal pan. 
Smelt are slapped onto the floor. 
They count over 800 fish altogether -- two-thirds of them alewives -- and record the results on a clipboard. 
The trawling and counting will continue through the night. 

   Some scientists say it may take five years to predict the fate of the alewives. 
At the very least, contends Niles Kevern, a fisheries biologist, the years of tinkering with the waters' ecosystem, compounded by the constant runoff of chemicals and waste from surrounding farms and cities, have committed humans permanently to the role of caretaker of the Great Lakes. 

   "We're in too deep to back off now," he says. 
For the lakes to determine a natural balance of their own, he reasons, mankind "would have to step way off -- I mean off the planet." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
