ID: 121	RANK: 15	SCORE: 20.151434
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870408-0166 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:
Baseball Stories: Martin, Maris and the Yanks
---
By Joe Mysak</HL>
<DD> 04/08/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Old-timers know that baseball today is not what it was even 30 years ago. 
Billy Martin, who has been building winning ball clubs (and then getting fired from them) over much of this period, tells why. 

   In "BillyBall" (Doubleday, 276 pages, $16.95), Mr. Martin, with the help of New York Daily News sport columnist Phil Pepe, relates what he's done since the publication of his autobiography, "Number 1," seven years ago. 
Along the way he writes about managers and managing, why infielders often make the best managers, sketches George Steinbrenner and Reggie Jackson, tells how to put together a lineup, and discusses free agents, some old friends and, of course, the old days. 

   At age 60, he is not particularly old as far as managers go, but the game he played as second baseman for the New York Yankees during the 1950s had more in common with the game played by John McGraw at the turn of the century than it does with the one played today. 

   Today's player, in Mr. Martin's opinion, does not spend enough time in the minor leagues learning his trade. 
When he does make the big club, he rooms alone, and does not get the opportunity to talk baseball with a roomie. 
He feels little team loyalty. 
Long-term contracts sap his incentive to perform. 
And if he gets a powerful enough agent, he may be able to get his manager fired or otherwise dictate club policy. 

   Finally, there are the malcontents, who, despite fancy contracts, say they no longer want to play for their team because it is "not fun" anymore, which usually means that they don't like the skipper because he believes in platooning. 
Mr. Martin's advice: "I wish baseball would just release them. 
Nobody sign the SOBs. 
You don't want to play here? 
You don't like it here? 
Released. 
Go home. 
Go to work. 
You get no more salary, no more having your contract renegotiated, no more calling your agent or the Players' Association for every little thing." 

   The solution, he says, is more one-year contracts for marginal players whose value has been inflated, and a less competitive free-agent market. 
The owners, who can take great responsibility for starting the whole mess, seem to be coming around to these ideas, which is why several familiar faces were not in a uniform on opening day. 

   In contrast with this tale of the preposterous debasement of the national pastime is "Sixty-One" (Macmillan, 269 pages, $19.95), by Tony Kubek and Terry Pluto, a history of the sublime 1961 Yankees, "the most selfless team I've ever managed" in the words of Ralph Houk. 
It is a story of redemption, pursuit and triumph, built around one of the most magnificent feats in baseball. 

   The story belongs to Roger Maris and his pursuit of Babe Ruth's record 60 home runs in one season. 
Fans tend to root for records to be broken -- but in 1961, they wanted Mickey Mantle, Maris's teammate, to do it, and in 154 games, the same number of games it had taken Ruth, not the 162 games of the expanded schedule. 
Ford Frick, then commissioner of baseball, called attention to the difference between the two records, and rightly so. 
But it does not detract from its heroic quality. 
As Mantle says, "It was something. . . . 
All I know is that no one did it before or since, and I know how damn hard it is to do it, because I tried it and never made it." 

   At the time, however, Maris was subject to abuse from fans, tears from Ruth's widow, attacks from old-timers who contended Maris was unworthy because he was not as colorful as the Bambino and was not a .300 hitter, and from newspaper sportswriters who took joy in orchestrating the attack. 
Maris hit his 61, but paid the price, and from all accounts was not the same man afterward. 

   But the story goes beyond Mickey and Roger and ace pitcher Whitey Ford (who won 25 games and lost only four that season) and Babe Ruth's ghost. 
The fabric of consistent, winning teams is of a finer weave. 
This is a story of great and small, and Mr. Kubek, with the help of sportswriter Pluto, makes sure to tell the small. 
It is the story of a team that came back after the heartbreaking loss of the World Series in seven games in 1960 to win 109 games in 1961, and to win the series that year in five. 

   It is the story of Ralph Houk, who replaced the legendary Casey Stengel at the helm. 
And it is the story of, among others, the acrobatic third baseman Clete Boyer; utility man Johnny Blanchard, who hit 21 homers, many of them game-winners, in only 243 at bats; and Luis Arroyo, the chubby relief pitcher who went 15-5 with 29 saves and a 2.19 earned run average. 

   It is also the story of Mr. Kubek, who was the shortstop for that team and who is now a commentator for NBC's "Game of the Week." 
He tells his story, and his teammates' stories, usually in their own words. 
There are some pretty good ones. 

   ---
   Mr. Mysak is assistant managing editor of The Daily Bond Buyer. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
