ID: 121	RANK: 71	SCORE: 14.924102
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870204-0034 </DOCNO>
<HL> Baseball Is a Game
Of Hits, Runs, Errors
And Lyrical Poetry
---
Spitball Magazine Celebrates
Sport in Ballads, Haiku;
Takeoffs of 'Mighty Casey'
---
By Jolie Solomon
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/04/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN>
<DATELINE> COVINGTON, Ky.  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   The 150 guests at the literary-awards banquet have just finished the traditional trivia contest. 
It's time for a seventh-inning stretch. 

   In the ornate Carnegie Arts Center, the literati line up for beer and peanuts. 
But they are soon called to attention for what is always the biggest hit of the annual festivities: the book-of-the-year award. 

   Among the nominees: "A Baseball Winter," "The Iowa Baseball Confederacy," and "Joe DiMaggio, a Bio-Bibliography." 
And the winner is . . . 
"The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract"! 

   This is the fourth annual Casey (as in "At the Bat") Award dinner. 
The event is sponsored by Spitball, the Literary Baseball Magazine, which is published just across the river in Cincinnati. 

   A hefty volume that is 70% statistics, this year's winning book may be written in another "language," as Mr. James calls baseball statistics. 
But then Spitball is dedicated to those whose passion for the game of inches is equaled only by their passion for the well-chosen word. 
Its readers and writers -- in 40 states and overseas -- "couldn't live without baseball or literature," contends editor Mike Shannon. 
Now entering its sixth season, the small quarterly already has outlasted most other fledgling literary journals. 

   In every issue, Spitball proves that no part of baseball is irrelevant to literature and that nothing in art or life is safe from the baseball metaphor. 
Consider "When I think of death, I think of the ballpark of God's imagination. 
I'll be hitting 'em out wherever I go." 
That passage is from "The Never Before Collected Works of Babe Ruth," a story by a writer who won a recent Spitball fiction contest. 

   "The Babe" appears often in Spitball. 
So do allusions to Mudville (Casey's hometown) and familiar quotes like "You could look it up," a trademark of New York Yankee immortal Casey Stengel and the title of a James Thurber baseball story. 

   Each issue is a pastiche of America's favorite pastime, but some of Spitball is accessible only to cognoscenti, who needn't be told that "D.H." means "designated hitter." 
One issue featured collages of ballplayers superimposed with the heads of heavy-hitter writers like David Herbert Lawrence, "poetry's first D.H." 

   Poetry, from haiku to free-form, is Spitball's staple. 

   "Courting,
   He took her to the Polo Grounds. 

   She loved dem Bums, but he said 

   You gotta see this Willie Mays.
   He was wonderful, she agreed, but she could not betray 

   Koufax and Campanella."
   And every issue features Parnassian Pressbox, a letter from Mr. Shannon named for the one-time home of Greek muses and the eternal seat of baseball scribes. 

   Spitball's contributors, of course, aren't the first to link baseball and literature. 
Many writers have tried to explain why baseball tempts them more than other sports. 
To some, it is the game's pastoral, seasonal nature and its place in American history. 
To others, it is baseball's celebration of the individual. 
And several say the game's languorous pace and many pauses simply encourage commentary. 

   "Baseball is to our everyday experience what poetry often is to common speech -- a slightly elevated and concentrated form," says Thomas Boswell, a Washington Post sports columnist, in his book "How Life Imitates the World Series." 

   Grantland Rice, a legendary sports reporter, often wrote in verse and once bragged that he was the only man who could send a poem by Western Union -- collect. 
His productions (like Ernest Thayer's classic "Casey") may be closer to ballads than to poetry. 
But other writer fans include Mark Twain, Thomas Wolfe, Robert Frost, Bernard Malamud and Marianne Moore. 

   The Minneapolis Review of Baseball, another quarterly somewhat slicker than Spitball, also has literary aspirations: Its T-shirts feature the New Yorker magazine's cover character looking through his monocle at a baseball speeding toward him. 
But the Review is more general, including everything from trivia quizzes to pieces on zen in baseball, all "from the fan's-eye view," says its editor. 

   Mr. Shannon isn't worried about the Review -- he even writes for it. 
Anyway, he thinks Spitball's mission is more purely literary. 
That is why he rejects so many "play-by-play, blow-by-blow" accounts of Little League contests. 

   Mr. Shannon shares with the typical baseball fanatic a frightening retention of statistics, memories of sandlot catches, and the reluctant certainty that he will never make the big leagues. (The mustachioed, lean Mr. Shannon is no relation to a St. Louis Cardinal of the same name whose main distinction, notes the editor, was setting strikeout records in the 1960s.) 

   A devotee of Willie Mays, Mr. Shannon is writing a novel called "The Last Willie." 
He also sees significance in his own mother's name -- Willie Mae -- and the fact that she gave birth to him in 1951, Willie Mays's rookie year. 
Besides his baseball writing and editing, Mr. Shannon's only concern is caring for his children, Casey, Mickey and Megan -- the last named by his wife, a recreational therapist and the family breadwinner. 

   Mr. Shannon sees Spitball as a haven for unheralded writers who, because of their predilection for baseball, might be deemed minor-league by other publications. 
And Spitball awards the Casey, he says, because no baseball book has ever won a Pulitzer or an American Book Award. 
"There's a certain mentality that, if it's about baseball, it's trivial," laments Roger Kahn, the author of "The Boys of Summer" and last year's Casey winner. 

   Like most literary journals, Spitball has little capital, scanty supplies, and a circulation that hardly encourages advertisers. 
Many literary journals survive on 500 or so subscribers. 
Though "closely guarded," Spitball's circulation figure is probably in that ballpark. 

   But Spitball must gain respect in two different arenas. 
As the editor of a baseball publication, Mr. Shannon naturally seeks press credentials for major events. 
He did get a press pass for the 1984 World Series -- now preserved under glass in his study that doubles as Spitball's office. 
But he has been turned down the past two years. 

   Literary lights don't always shine on Spitball, either. 
Mr. Shannon has solicited manuscripts from some "halfway famous baseball poets" who haven't deigned to respond. 
The first Casey winner has yet to acknowledge the honor. 
Things are looking up, though. 
This year, Macmillan Publishing Co. volunteered a Casey nominee. 

   Spitball has no clear plans for expanding readership. 
Its co-founder, Jim Harrison, who died unexpectedly last fall at age 44, had suggested a mailing to team clubhouses. 
Mr. Shannon says he defends athletes "when people knock them for being dumb. 
But I have to admit that not many are going to sit down and read a poetry magazine." 

   While their game plans sometimes differed, Mr. Shannon misses his partner. ("Life threw him a spitball," begins the poem eulogizing him in a recent issue.) 
Mr. Harrison was also a financial partner, and Mr. Shannon is no businessman. 
Award Night visitors who paid $10 for admission got not only beer and hot dogs but also a free, one-year subscription worth $8. 
Despite such bad calls, Mr. Shannon says, Spitball is edging into the black. 

   For publicity and promotion, he is counting on Spitball's national "Casey at the Bat" poetry contest, which will wind up in 1988, the Casey centennial. 
Though the latest edition of Martin Gardner's "The Annotated Casey at the Bat" contains 25 Casey takeoffs, Mr. Shannon believes there is room for more. 
"I'm not saying it's the greatest poem ever written," he acknowledges, "but it's the most famous." 

   Or, as poet Robert Service put it, 

   I'd rather, I can tell you flat, 

   When for Parnassus bound,
   Have authored "Casey at the Bat," 

   Than odes of Ezra Pound.
   When it comes to the Casey contest, Mr. Shannon is proprietary. 
"That's our province," he says. 
"We're the only ones putting out a regular magazine of baseball poetry. 
If somebody sits down to write a history of baseball poetry in this century, they'll have to come to Spitball first." 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
