ID: 156	RANK: 45	SCORE: 9.562498
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ880113-0086 </DOCNO>
<HL> Ashton-Tate, Microsoft Plan Linked Product </HL>
<AUTHOR> Paul B. Carroll (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR>
<SO> </SO>
<CO> TATE MSFT </CO>
<IN> EDP </IN>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   Ashton-Tate Corp. and Microsoft Corp., in an unusual display of amity between two of the Big Three in personal-computer software, will announce a software product agreement here today, industry sources said. 

   The sources said Microsoft will announce the introduction of software that manages databases on computer networks. 
It will produce that software relying on technology supplied by Sybase Inc., a closely held concern in which Apple Computer Inc. holds a minority stake. 

   Ashton-Tate will license the software and produce a version of its dominant dBASE database program that runs on a single personal computer but will work with the Microsoft/Sybase network software. 

   Analysts said the software should help Ashton-Tate remove some of the considerable concern over whether it can update the venerable dBASE product to keep up with the new generation of computer hardware and operating-system software. 

   For Microsoft, analysts said the agreement will ensure that it can offer the general public the sort of products that International Business Machines Corp. has promised its customers with its newest line of personal computers. 
The software for the IBM machines, called the "extended edition" of Microsoft's new OS/2 operating system, is designed to let IBM personal computers talk more easily to each other and to extract information from minicomputers and mainframes. 

   Two software offerings are required to duplicate the benefits of IBM's new operating system on non-IBM machines. 
Microsoft has already announced the first, software developed with 3Com Corp. that manages communications between computers in a network. 
Today's announcement will introduce the second necessary product. 

   Ron Posner, an industry figure who was until recently executive vice president of Borland International Inc., said, "What Microsoft hopes to do is make (its software) a standard before 'extended edition' becomes one. 
Microsoft is hoping that at the least there will be two standards, its and IBM's." 

   He likened the situation to what happened with Microsoft's Windows product, a piece of software that lets personal-computer users move more easily between applications. 
IBM was pushing its rival product, called TopView, but Windows caught on before TopView ever got rolling, and TopView failed. 

   Mr. Posner had discussed an arrangement with Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft, similar to the one Ashton-Tate ultimately reached, while he was with Boreland. 
He guessed it will take Microsoft six to 12 months to produce the software based on the Sybase technology. 
He noted that Sybase originally developed its product for the Digital Equipment Corp. VAX computer, which is far more powerful than a personal computer and has far more resources to devote to operating-system layers of software. 
"Microsoft hasn't yet shown that they can downsize Sybase," Mr. Posner said. 

   Mr. Posner, who also used to work for Ashton-Tate, said the announcement should help the Torrance, Calif., concern deal with heavy competition provided by Oracle Systems Corp. Oracle sells a single type of database software compatible with the whole range of computer hardware, from personal computers on up to mainframes, and has been selling corporate accounts on the idea that this makes it easier to move data between different sized machines. 

   Mr. Posner said the Sybase technology will make it a lot easier for Ashton-Tate customers to draw information down from big computers for use in dBASE products on personal computers. 
But Ashton-Tate will still have the problem of developing a version of dBASE that will let many people use it on a network simultaneously, Mr. Posner said. 
He isn't unbiased, given that while he was at Borland he had been responsible for Paradox, a major product rival to dBASE, but many in the industry share his feeling that rivals are gaining on the Ashton-Tate program. 

   David Readerman, a securities analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co., said Ashton-Tate's agreement with Microsoft allays some of the worry about dBASE's future. 
But he also said he'll be "underwhelmed" unless the announcement also includes talk of a partnership giving Ashton-Tate access to technology that won't be available to its competitors. 

   Mr. Posner said, "Short term, it's a good solution, but, long term, I think it makes Ashton-Tate and Microsoft more direct competitors." 
Microsofts' having software to manage databases on a network means it will bring out similar software that will run on the individual personal computers hooked up to that network, Mr. Posner said, which would mean competition for dBASE. 
"I don't see the relationship lasting too long," Mr. Posner said. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
