ID: 165	RANK: 53	SCORE: 9.473299
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870213-0076 </DOCNO>
<HL> U.S. Chocolates
Ring Sweet Sales
For Small Shops
---
By Meg Sullivan
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 02/13/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<IN> FOOD &amp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN>
<TEXT>
   Sophisticated chocolate buyers are shoving Belgian and French confections out of the way this Valentine's Day to get at the really fine stuff -- from the U.S. 

   Not those sugary, mass-produced creams that have a swirly initial on top and cost maybe $4.50 a pound tops. 
Today's American premium chocolates are handmade, often by a small producer or single-store boutique. 
And although they were inspired by the mystique of European brands, the new American chocolate makers have applied a distinctly New World spin, offering fresher, natural ingredients and such exotic fillings as goat cheese laced with maple syrup. 
Naturally the price has gone up along with the style, to $25 or more a pound. 
Even so, the Americans are hurting imports from Europe, which were off 14% last year from 1985. 

   "We can thank Godiva" for the American chocolate renaissance, says Kent Lyon, who oversees sales in five southwestern states for Guittard Chocolate Co., Burlingame, Calif. 
The premium Belgian brand, first imported in 1966 and bought by Campbell Soup Co. in 1974, "romanticized chocolate and made it possible for us to charge more and really upgrade our product," he says. 

   Boutique chocolatiers got into the act about a decade ago, when Alice Medrich, a Berkeley, Calif., M.B.A. candidate, began fooling around with a chocolate-truffle recipe she had picked up in France. 
The truffles are made with fresh cream, chocolate and sugar. 
In France, they're walnut-sized. 

   Mrs. Medrich's initial attempts were more like golf balls, and not very pretty. 
In time she solved the aesthetic problem, but the larger size became the American standard, and the rest is history. 
Truffles spread first through Northern California and then the rest of the country. 
Mrs. Medrich now runs a small chain of shops called Cocolat in the San Francisco area. 

   "American chocolatiers have keyed into the fact that they can offer fresh, handmade chocolates with all-natural ingredients," says Guittard's Mr. Lyon. 
Mass-manufactured European chocolates have stablilizers added because of the time it takes to get them to market, he notes. 

   In addition to borrowing the idea of truffles and French-sounding names, the new American chocolatiers have also picked up the European technique of shell molding, building the chocolate from the outside instead of inside out as American dipped chocolates have always been done. 
The result is a harder, more chocolaty shell that can hold liquor and can assume jewel-like shapes. (At least two boutique chocolatiers in Los Angeles have had silversmiths design their chocolate molds.) 

   American chocolate makers have also been more daring about experimenting with flavors. 
For instance, Champlain Chocolates, a small producer in Burlington, Vt., makes bourbon-pecan and vanilla malt truffles. 
And New England Truffles, a Rumford, R.I. retailer, sells what owner John Elkay calls "the chocolates Europeans have yet to discover": chocolate-coated Massachusetts goat's cheese laced with maple syrup and New England fruit wines. 
"It tastes like chocolate cheesecake," he asserts. 

   Like Mrs. Medrich, the truffle queen, many new chocolate makers lack a traditional background. 
Barbara Albright, editor-in-chief of Chocolatier Magazine, says the bimonthly gets two or three letters a week asking how to set up a shop. 

   "I don't have to inherit a confectionery from my father or go to a fancy school," says Mary Yoon, a former psychologist who now runs Entiche du Chocolat, a shop in Whittier, Calif. 
"I can do it the American way, by being a pioneer." 

   Now, in what Mrs. Medrich calls "that wonderful American phenomenon where a small idea gets institutionalized by the establishment," traditional chocolate purveyors are rushing to get on the bandwagon. 

   See's Candy Shops, a San Francisco-based chain whose logo is a grandmotherly white-haired woman added a truffle line last year and plans to expand it. 
So has Fanny Farmer Candy Shops, a Bedford, Mass.-based chain founded in 1919. 
And in the last five years Forrest Mars, whose family founded M&amp;M/Mars, has opened 47 premium chocolate shops specializing in truffles and chocolate cordials. 

   But a counter trend may be setting in. 
Campbell's Godiva unit, the brand that started it all, has introduced a more American line. 
Called Barringer's, its offerings are unabashedly down-home: heavy on caramels, peanuts and milk chocolate. 

   "We've tried to recapture the sort of recipe your mother might have had," says Carmen Dubroc, Godiva's vice president of marketing. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
