ID: 256	RANK: 40	SCORE: 9.469924
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ870514-0156 </DOCNO>
<HL> LEISURE &amp; ARTS -- Film:
On Film: The Road to 'Ishtar'
---
By Julie Salamon</HL>
<DD> 05/14/87</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<TEXT>
   Show-business people "in the know" wrote "Ishtar" off months ago. 
It didn't matter that they hadn't seen the picture yet -- or even that it wasn't finished. 
They just knew. 

   In other words, "Ishtar" had bad word of mouth. 
It had bad word of mouth because people in the know knew that a $40 million road picture directed by Elaine May would bomb. 
They also knew they didn't want to see Dustin Hoffman and Warren Beatty in a road picture. 

   I mention all this only because occasionally a picture is burdened by such dismal advance vibrations that it ends up benefiting from the "it wasn't so bad" factor. 
In other words, the market discounts its stock and then discounts it again on the upside. 

   What I'm saying is that "Ishtar" isn't so bad. 
It has some of the funniest bad song lyrics ever written, some amusing moments with a blind camel, and occasional flashes of Ms. May's quirky brilliance. 

   Now all that may not add up to $40 million worth of movie. 
But that's for shareholders of Coca-Cola Co. and Time Inc. to worry about. ("Ishtar's" distributor, Columbia Pictures, is a subsidiary of Coke, and Time's Home Box Office co-financed the movie.) 
The $40 million (more or less) spent to make the movie should bother the rest of us only because "Ishtar" looks overproduced for what it is. 

   What it is, or, what it's trying to be, is a copy of the old Bob Hope-Bing Crosby road pictures -- dopey, slapstick adventures with a kind of haphazard charm exuded by brand-name stars. 
Perhaps because of Ms. May's reputed perfectionism, and certainly because of the overly polished settings, there is no haphazard feeling to "Ishtar." 

   With some exceptions -- Charles Grodin, in a sly cameo as a CIA spook and Mr. Hoffman here and there -- the whole undertaking seems labored. 
I wanted to like it, but I kept feeling as if I were watching an unsteady comedian deliver the punch line before he's told the joke. 

   The story Ms. May has written is silly and slight enough to be the scenario for a "classic" road picture. 
Two untalented lyricists and even more untalented singers sign up for a gig at a tourist hotel in Morocco. 
They find themselves embroiled in a preposterous political quagmire at the center of which is a beautiful girl. 
Here, the part once played by Dorothy Lamour went to the lovely French actress and off-screen Beatty-pal, Isabelle Adjani. 
The male stars get to dress up like sheiks, ride camels and tell jokes that play off their real-life personas. (So Mr. Beatty, reputedly an "homme fatal" in real life, keeps musing aloud about his character's inability to attract women.) 

   Turning this kind of froth into a big-budget production does seem like a foolhardy idea, particularly considering Ms. May's subdued approach to comedy. 
Originally half of a comedy team with Mike Nichols, she went on to write plays and movies that drew from her uniquely befuddled yet acute sense of satire. 
She wrote and directed "The New Leaf" and "Mikey and Nickey," directed "The Heartbreak Kid," and wrote "Heaven Can Wait" for Mr. Beatty. 
She has a deft touch and a marvelous comic vision, but her jokes aren't big yuks. 

   They are subtle yuks that often get lost in the overblown goings-on she's put them up against in "Ishtar." 
The leading comedy duo doesn't help. 
Mr. Beatty has a kind of winsome charm as Lyle Rogers, the dizzy former ice-cream truck driver who knew he was destined to become a songwriter when he'd compose ditties like "Hot Fudge Love" while driving his route. 
But charm is a Beatty trademark. 
He's so understated here, though, that the charm doesn't fully emerge. 

   With Mr. Beatty behaving in this whispery fashion, the comic burden is left on Mr. Hoffman's game shoulders. 
He's Chuck Clarke (get it? 
Rogers and Clarke?), a songwriter so dense he serenades a couple celebrating their 53rd wedding anniversary at a restaurant where he's the entertainment with this lyric: "I'm leaving some love in my will." 
Still, although Mr. Hoffman seems tense in many scenes, when he's funny, he's very funny. 

   It's also true that he and Mr. Beatty are a funny pair to look at, the world's highest priced sight gag -- the big, lumbering Mr. Beatty alongside his bantam companion. 
But never in the film do they seem in tune with Ms. May's offbeat rhythms. 
Mr. Grodin, however, never misses a beat. 
Whenever he's onscreen as the blandly ruthless CIA man, you see what a giggle the whole picture might have been. 

   As it stands, awkward as a boy who walks naked into the "Y" pool and discovers a crowd gathered for a swim meet, "Ishtar" provides embarrassment, but also laughter. 
Ms. May has written some great jokes and clever lines: for example, the way Jack Weston, who does a brief but amusing stint as the low-level talent agent who represents the duo, sums up his clients' career prospects. 

   "Frankly you're old," he says. 
"You're white. 
You got no shtick." 

   The movie's cleverest running gag may also be its downfall. 
Ms. May and Paul Williams have written some hilariously rotten songs. 
"There's a wardrobe of love in my eyes/Look around, see if there's something in your size." 
That sort of thing. 
These are the kind of awful lyrics an astute lounge-lizard mimic such as Bill Murray could have a lot of fun with. 
But Messrs. 
Hoffman and Beatty are so tone-deaf they don't even know how to play the songs for deadpan humor. 
They seem old, white and without shtick. 

   ---
   Eddie Murphy, however, is young, black and overflowing with shtick. 
Maybe one day he'll come to his senses and get new advice on what movies he chooses to display his talents. 
You can see him in "Beverly Hills Cop II," but do yourself a favor: Rent the original and watch it at home. 
It didn't seem like a masterwork then, but, compared with the sequel, it sure does now. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
