ID: 256	RANK: 42	SCORE: 9.409207
<DOC>
<DOCNO> WSJ861226-0032 </DOCNO>
<HL> Iran, Ivan Boesky
Are Music to Ears
Of Robert Warren
---
He Writes Songs Lambasting
Life's Injustices, Insanities;
A Gripe for Frank Perdue
---
By Bowen Northrup
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL>
<DD> 12/26/86</DD>
<SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO>
<DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE>
<TEXT>
   If they set up an Old Curmudgeon prize, Robert A. Warren figures as a shoo-in. 
"I'll take on anybody bigger than me," he says. 
"I'll never take on a little guy." 

   Many are bigger. 
Mr. Warren is 126 pounds arranged on a pencil-shaped physique. 
He is 71 years old and ailing. 
In his New York Mets cap, hooded sweatshirt, jeans and sneakers, all blue, he looks more cuddly than menacing. 

   However, he has taken on all sorts of targets -- the telephone company, the U.S. Postal Service, yuppies, soap operas, greedy people, the Moral Majority and politicians, to mention a few -- with the following weapons: an old grand piano, a raspy, penetrating singing voice and a knack for writing satirical little songs that bite. 

   Take, for example, these verses from his "Yippie-Yupppie-I-Ay": 

   Our kitchen's equipped with the basic necessities: 

   Cuisinart, cookbooks and pasta machine, 

   But we never use 'em 'cause we mostly dine out
   On fancy, extravagant nouvelle cuisine. 

   You won't find us fillin' our tummies with burgers, 

   And tuna on white is a cardinal sin.
   We lay in gourmet from the neighborhood shops -- 

   If it wasn't for takeout, we'd never eat in.
   Mr. Warren is a songwriter turning into a performer in his eighth decade. 
Like many people, he feels that the world is bristling with swinishness and woe. 
But rather than subsiding into impotent indignation, he works off his bile by writing a mocking tune and laughing at the whole silly business. 

   Many of his songs don't get performed. 
"I file 'em up here," he says, touching his temple as he plays the piano in his cluttered Manhattan apartment. 
Some of his subjects -- like comedian Joan Rivers ("my darling Joan"), conservative Phyllis Schlafly ("she's all the woman any man could need") or hotelier Leona Helmsley ("Leona, the Palace queen") -- might be happier if their songs were unaired. 

   Mr. Warren's muse is stirred by subjects ranging from the cost of chicken to public affairs. 
"Haldeman, Erlichman, Mitchell and Dean," a song popular in the early 1970s, was one of Mr. Warren's, though he didn't perform it. 
Now there are the Wall Street scandal and the White House-Iran affair. 
"Nothing has changed," he says. 
"It's insane." 

   "Insanity," in fact, is the title of his new record album. 
On Thanksgiving eve, just before appearing on the "Today Show," Mr. Warren penned new lyrics on Iran and Ivan Boesky for the album's title song. 
The president, he noted, 

   ...beat his manly breast and vowed he'd rid the world of terror. 

   He first laid all the blame on Carter for Iran, 

   And then went out and fixed it so it's hitting the fan.
   Mr. Boesky got this broadside: 

   By ratting on his closest pals and turning fink, 

   So far he's kept his freedom and avoided the clink.
   Mr. Warren says his songs are for "kids over 12 with an IQ over 50 who can stand upright." 
There isn't much for that audience now, he says. 
Movies and television, he argues, have been "turned over to the 12-year-olds." 
Rock music gets bad grades, too. 

   College radio stations have been playing Mr. Warren's "Dr. 
Ruth," "The Takeover Tango," "Greed" and some of the other songs on the "Insanity" album, and the students seem to like them. 
"I've had some really good response," says David Brennan, the general manager of WERG-FM in Erie, Pa., the home of Gannon University. 

   "He's no Pavarotti," Mr. Brennan adds. 
James Brady, a columnist for Advertising Age and a Warren crony, says his friend's singing voice sounds like "a muffler commercial." 
But it seems to suit the satirical material. 

   "I'm not by nature a ham," says Mr. Warren. 
"I grew up in New England, where you're taught not to show emotion." 
But on the "Today Show," with millions watching, he sang and hammed as though he were with friends at home. 
"I like people, and it shows," he says by way of explanation. 

   Mr. Warren spent some 25 years arranging and writing music for the likes of Artie Shaw, Eddy Duchin and Guy Lombardo and publishing some music himself. 
He soured on the commercial-music scene after rock took over. 
"I had some bad habits, like rhyming," he says. 

   But the Don Quixote inclination had been lurking all along. 
The telephone company is a longtime foe. 
Back in 1972, Mr. Warren sued the utility in small-claims court -- "for lousy service," he says. 
When the old exchanges gave way to all-number codes, Mr. Warren wrote a musical lament to one of them: "Poor little Wickersham-2, how could they do that to you?" 

   Watergate fanned Mr. Warren's dissatisfaction into an eternal flame of dissent. 
"I kept writing these things so I could keep my sanity," he says. 

   Riding buses, or sitting in his apartment reading stacks of newspapers, he muses on the latest outrage and crafts lyrics to fit. 
For example, when the Sgt. York air-defense failed to work, Mr. Warren wrote a song for the Pentagon, "Back to the Drawing Board Blues." 

   One song imagines the "steely dark eyes" of Leona Helmsley finding a bit of lint on the jacket of a captain in a Helmsley hotel, whereupon the captain finds himself unemployed. 
In another, Mr. Warren naughtily fantasizes about Mrs. Schlafly greeting him in the evening "with a cold martini in a filmy negligee." 

   Some grievances are too recent to have coalesced into song. 
"I'm going to write a stinging letter to {New York Gov. Mario} Cuomo," Mr. Warren warns (the state lottery and high milk prices are the issues). 
Frank Perdue is in trouble, too ("Chicken is $1.29 a pound, a year ago it was 79 cents"). 

   Mr. Warren has noticed that the Second Avenue subway in Manhattan didn't get built, despite huge outlays of funds. 
"The only hole in the ground we got is a pothole," he says. 

   "The underdog in me comes out," proclaims Mr. Warren. 
"Let's fight back." 
A recent target was the banking system. 
When Mr. Warren's record began to sell, his little company, with headquarters in his apartment, had some trouble collecting credit-card revenues accumulating in banks because he wasn't registered as a legitimate retailer. 

   "Isn't that insanity?" he fumes. 
"The banks don't want the little guy anymore. 
They want Brazil and Argentina, who will bankrupt them." 
But then the matter was resolved, and Mr. Warren, typically, forgot about his ire at the banks. 

   Rodney Publications, Mr. Warren's company, is named after his Old English sheepdog, who died some years ago and is memorialized in photographs around the apartment. 
Although Mr. Warren got various kinds of professional assistance in putting out "Insanity" (Mitch Miller, for instance, was the producer and provided some seed money for the project), the record in many ways is a one-man project. 

   "I did the editing, the cutting," recalls Mr. Warren. 
"I was the messenger boy. 
I brought it in for $12,000. 
Nobody ever heard of such a thing. 
If Columbia had done it, it would have cost $150,000." 
That was for 3,000 albums and 2,500 tape cassettes. 
Because of the "Today Show" and other publicity, an additional 10,000 are being produced now. 

   On the "Today Show," Mr. Warren expressed gratitude for living in a country where he can "speak my mind and not be sent to Gulag." 
And he says, "If you can make people laugh, it's the best medicine in the world. 
Life is too short to cry." 

   ---
   Lyrics from "Yippie-Yuppie-I-Ay" and "Insanity" c1986 by Rodney Publications Inc. 

</TEXT>
</DOC>
